# 7 -- [Lua Standalone]{#7}

Although Lua has been designed as an extension language, to be embedded
in a host C program, it is also frequently used as a standalone
language. An interpreter for Lua as a standalone language, called simply
`lua`, is provided with the standard distribution. The standalone
interpreter includes all standard libraries. Its usage is:

         lua [options] [script [args]]

The options are:

-   **`-e `*`stat`*:** execute string *stat*;
-   **`-i`:** enter interactive mode after running *script*;
-   **`-l `*`mod`*:** \"require\" *mod* and assign the result to global
    *mod*;
-   **`-v`:** print version information;
-   **`-E`:** ignore environment variables;
-   **`-W`:** turn warnings on;
-   **`--`:** stop handling options;
-   **`-`:** execute `stdin` as a file and stop handling options.

After handling its options, `lua` runs the given *script*. When called
without arguments, `lua` behaves as `lua -v -i` when the standard input
(`stdin`) is a terminal, and as `lua -` otherwise.

When called without the option `-E`, the interpreter checks for an
environment variable [`LUA_INIT_5_4`]{#pdf-LUA_INIT_5_4} (or
[`LUA_INIT`]{#pdf-LUA_INIT} if the versioned name is not defined) before
running any argument. If the variable content has the format
`@`*`filename`*, then `lua` executes the file. Otherwise, `lua` executes
the string itself.

When called with the option `-E`, Lua does not consult any environment
variables. In particular, the values of
[`package.path`](#pdf-package.path) and
[`package.cpath`](#pdf-package.cpath) are set with the default paths
defined in `luaconf.h`.

The options `-e`, `-l`, and `-W` are handled in the order they appear.
For instance, an invocation like

         $ lua -e 'a=1' -llib1 script.lua

will first set `a` to 1, then require the library `lib1`, and finally
run the file `script.lua` with no arguments. (Here `$` is the shell
prompt. Your prompt may be different.)

Before running any code, `lua` collects all command-line arguments in a
global table called `arg`. The script name goes to index 0, the first
argument after the script name goes to index 1, and so on. Any arguments
before the script name (that is, the interpreter name plus its options)
go to negative indices. For instance, in the call

         $ lua -la b.lua t1 t2

the table is like this:

         arg = { [-2] = "lua", [-1] = "-la",
                 [0] = "b.lua",
                 [1] = "t1", [2] = "t2" }

If there is no script in the call, the interpreter name goes to index 0,
followed by the other arguments. For instance, the call

         $ lua -e "print(arg[1])"

will print \"`-e`\". If there is a script, the script is called with
arguments `arg[1]`, ···, `arg[#arg]`. Like all chunks in Lua, the script
is compiled as a vararg function.

In interactive mode, Lua repeatedly prompts and waits for a line. After
reading a line, Lua first try to interpret the line as an expression. If
it succeeds, it prints its value. Otherwise, it interprets the line as a
statement. If you write an incomplete statement, the interpreter waits
for its completion by issuing a different prompt.

If the global variable [`_PROMPT`]{#pdf-_PROMPT} contains a string, then
its value is used as the prompt. Similarly, if the global variable
[`_PROMPT2`]{#pdf-_PROMPT2} contains a string, its value is used as the
secondary prompt (issued during incomplete statements).

In case of unprotected errors in the script, the interpreter reports the
error to the standard error stream. If the error object is not a string
but has a metamethod `__tostring`, the interpreter calls this metamethod
to produce the final message. Otherwise, the interpreter converts the
error object to a string and adds a stack traceback to it. When warnings
are on, they are simply printed in the standard error output.

When finishing normally, the interpreter closes its main Lua state (see
[`lua_close`](#lua_close)). The script can avoid this step by calling
[`os.exit`](#pdf-os.exit) to terminate.

To allow the use of Lua as a script interpreter in Unix systems, Lua
skips the first line of a file chunk if it starts with `#`. Therefore,
Lua scripts can be made into executable programs by using `chmod +x` and
the `#!` form, as in

         #!/usr/local/bin/lua

Of course, the location of the Lua interpreter may be different in your
machine. If `lua` is in your `PATH`, then

         #!/usr/bin/env lua

is a more portable solution.

