# The Stack

Lua uses a *virtual stack* to pass values to and from C. Each element in
this stack represents a Lua value (**nil**, number, string, etc.).
Functions in the API can access this stack through the Lua state
parameter that they receive.

Whenever Lua calls C, the called function gets a new stack, which is
independent of previous stacks and of stacks of C functions that are
still active. This stack initially contains any arguments to the
C function and it is where the C function can store temporary Lua values
and must push its results to be returned to the caller (see
[`lua_CFunction`](#lua_CFunction)).

For convenience, most query operations in the API do not follow a strict
stack discipline. Instead, they can refer to any element in the stack by
using an *index*: A positive index represents an absolute stack
position, starting at 1 as the bottom of the stack; a negative index
represents an offset relative to the top of the stack. More
specifically, if the stack has *n* elements, then index 1 represents the
first element (that is, the element that was pushed onto the stack
first) and index *n* represents the last element; index -1 also
represents the last element (that is, the element at the top) and index
*-n* represents the first element.

## Stack Size

When you interact with the Lua API, you are responsible for ensuring
consistency. In particular, *you are responsible for controlling stack
overflow*. When you call any API function, you must ensure the stack has
enough room to accommodate the results.

There is one exception to the above rule: When you call a Lua function
without a fixed number of results (see [`lua_call`](#lua_call)), Lua
ensures that the stack has enough space for all results. However, it
does not ensure any extra space. So, before pushing anything on the
stack after such a call you should use
[`lua_checkstack`](#lua_checkstack).

Whenever Lua calls C, it ensures that the stack has space for at least
[`LUA_MINSTACK`]{#pdf-LUA_MINSTACK} extra elements; that is, you can
safely push up to `LUA_MINSTACK` values into it. `LUA_MINSTACK` is
defined as 20, so that usually you do not have to worry about stack
space unless your code has loops pushing elements onto the stack.
Whenever necessary, you can use the function
[`lua_checkstack`](#lua_checkstack) to ensure that the stack has enough
space for pushing new elements.

## Valid and Acceptable Indices

Any function in the API that receives stack indices works only with
*valid indices* or *acceptable indices*.

A *valid index* is an index that refers to a position that stores a
modifiable Lua value. It comprises stack indices between 1 and the stack
top (`1 ≤ abs(index) ≤ top`) plus *pseudo-indices*, which represent some
positions that are accessible to C code but that are not in the stack.
Pseudo-indices are used to access the registry (see [§4.3](#4.3)) and
the upvalues of a C function (see [§4.2](#4.2)).

Functions that do not need a specific mutable position, but only a value
(e.g., query functions), can be called with acceptable indices. An
*acceptable index* can be any valid index, but it also can be any
positive index after the stack top within the space allocated for the
stack, that is, indices up to the stack size. (Note that 0 is never an
acceptable index.) Indices to upvalues (see [§4.2](#4.2)) greater than
the real number of upvalues in the current C function are also
acceptable (but invalid). Except when noted otherwise, functions in the
API work with acceptable indices.

Acceptable indices serve to avoid extra tests against the stack top when
querying the stack. For instance, a C function can query its third
argument without the need to check whether there is a third argument,
that is, without the need to check whether 3 is a valid index.

For functions that can be called with acceptable indices, any non-valid
index is treated as if it contains a value of a virtual type
[`LUA_TNONE`]{#pdf-LUA_TNONE}, which behaves like a nil value.

## Pointers to strings

Several functions in the API return pointers (`const char*`) to Lua
strings in the stack. (See [`lua_pushfstring`](#lua_pushfstring),
[`lua_pushlstring`](#lua_pushlstring),
[`lua_pushstring`](#lua_pushstring), and
[`lua_tolstring`](#lua_tolstring). See also
[`luaL_checklstring`](#luaL_checklstring),
[`luaL_checkstring`](#luaL_checkstring), and
[`luaL_tolstring`](#luaL_tolstring) in the auxiliary library.)

In general, Lua\'s garbage collection can free or move internal memory
and then invalidate pointers to internal strings. To allow a safe use of
these pointers, The API guarantees that any pointer to a string in a
stack index is valid while the string value at that index is not removed
from the stack. (It can be moved to another index, though.) When the
index is a pseudo-index (referring to an upvalue), the pointer is valid
while the corresponding call is active and the corresponding upvalue is
not modified.

Some functions in the debug interface also return pointers to strings,
namely [`lua_getlocal`](#lua_getlocal),
[`lua_getupvalue`](#lua_getupvalue), [`lua_setlocal`](#lua_setlocal),
and [`lua_setupvalue`](#lua_setupvalue). For these functions, the
pointer is guaranteed to be valid while the caller function is active
and the given closure (if one was given) is in the stack.

Except for these guarantees, the garbage collector is free to invalidate
any pointer to internal strings.

