# Error Handling in C

Internally, Lua uses the C `longjmp` facility to handle errors. (Lua
will use exceptions if you compile it as C++; search for `LUAI_THROW` in
the source code for details.) When Lua faces any error, such as a memory
allocation error or a type error, it *raises* an error; that is, it does
a long jump. A *protected environment* uses `setjmp` to set a recovery
point; any error jumps to the most recent active recovery point.

Inside a C function you can raise an error explicitly by calling
[`lua_error`](#lua_error).

Most functions in the API can raise an error, for instance due to a
memory allocation error. The documentation for each function indicates
whether it can raise errors.

If an error happens outside any protected environment, Lua calls a
*panic function* (see [`lua_atpanic`](#lua_atpanic)) and then calls
`abort`, thus exiting the host application. Your panic function can
avoid this exit by never returning (e.g., doing a long jump to your own
recovery point outside Lua).

The panic function, as its name implies, is a mechanism of last resort.
Programs should avoid it. As a general rule, when a C function is called
by Lua with a Lua state, it can do whatever it wants on that Lua state,
as it should be already protected. However, when C code operates on
other Lua states (e.g., a Lua-state argument to the function, a Lua
state stored in the registry, or the result of
[`lua_newthread`](#lua_newthread)), it should use them only in API calls
that cannot raise errors.

The panic function runs as if it were a message handler (see
[§2.3](#2.3)); in particular, the error object is on the top of the
stack. However, there is no guarantee about stack space. To push
anything on the stack, the panic function must first check the available
space (see [§4.1.1](#4.1.1)).

## Status Codes

Several functions that report errors in the API use the following status
codes to indicate different kinds of errors or other conditions:

-   **[`LUA_OK`]{#pdf-LUA_OK} (0):** no errors.
-   **[`LUA_ERRRUN`]{#pdf-LUA_ERRRUN}:** a runtime error.
-   **[`LUA_ERRMEM`]{#pdf-LUA_ERRMEM}:** memory allocation error. For
    such errors, Lua does not call the message handler.
-   **[`LUA_ERRERR`]{#pdf-LUA_ERRERR}:** error while running the message
    handler.
-   **[`LUA_ERRSYNTAX`]{#pdf-LUA_ERRSYNTAX}:** syntax error during
    precompilation.
-   **[`LUA_YIELD`]{#pdf-LUA_YIELD}:** the thread (coroutine) yields.
-   **[`LUA_ERRFILE`]{#pdf-LUA_ERRFILE}:** a file-related error; e.g.,
    it cannot open or read the file.

These constants are defined in the header file `lua.h`.

