# Handling Yields in C

Internally, Lua uses the C `longjmp` facility to yield a coroutine.
Therefore, if a C function `foo` calls an API function and this API
function yields (directly or indirectly by calling another function that
yields), Lua cannot return to `foo` any more, because the `longjmp`
removes its frame from the C stack.

To avoid this kind of problem, Lua raises an error whenever it tries to
yield across an API call, except for three functions:
[`lua_yieldk`](#lua_yieldk), [`lua_callk`](#lua_callk), and
[`lua_pcallk`](#lua_pcallk). All those functions receive a *continuation
function* (as a parameter named `k`) to continue execution after a
yield.

We need to set some terminology to explain continuations. We have a
C function called from Lua which we will call the *original function*.
This original function then calls one of those three functions in the C
API, which we will call the *callee function*, that then yields the
current thread. This can happen when the callee function is
[`lua_yieldk`](#lua_yieldk), or when the callee function is either
[`lua_callk`](#lua_callk) or [`lua_pcallk`](#lua_pcallk) and the
function called by them yields.

Suppose the running thread yields while executing the callee function.
After the thread resumes, it eventually will finish running the callee
function. However, the callee function cannot return to the original
function, because its frame in the C stack was destroyed by the yield.
Instead, Lua calls a *continuation function*, which was given as an
argument to the callee function. As the name implies, the continuation
function should continue the task of the original function.

As an illustration, consider the following function:

         int original_function (lua_State *L) {
           ...     /* code 1 */
           status = lua_pcall(L, n, m, h);  /* calls Lua */
           ...     /* code 2 */
         }

Now we want to allow the Lua code being run by [`lua_pcall`](#lua_pcall)
to yield. First, we can rewrite our function like here:

         int k (lua_State *L, int status, lua_KContext ctx) {
           ...  /* code 2 */
         }
         
         int original_function (lua_State *L) {
           ...     /* code 1 */
           return k(L, lua_pcall(L, n, m, h), ctx);
         }

In the above code, the new function `k` is a *continuation function*
(with type [`lua_KFunction`](#lua_KFunction)), which should do all the
work that the original function was doing after calling
[`lua_pcall`](#lua_pcall). Now, we must inform Lua that it must call `k`
if the Lua code being executed by [`lua_pcall`](#lua_pcall) gets
interrupted in some way (errors or yielding), so we rewrite the code as
here, replacing [`lua_pcall`](#lua_pcall) by
[`lua_pcallk`](#lua_pcallk):

         int original_function (lua_State *L) {
           ...     /* code 1 */
           return k(L, lua_pcallk(L, n, m, h, ctx2, k), ctx1);
         }

Note the external, explicit call to the continuation: Lua will call the
continuation only if needed, that is, in case of errors or resuming
after a yield. If the called function returns normally without ever
yielding, [`lua_pcallk`](#lua_pcallk) (and [`lua_callk`](#lua_callk))
will also return normally. (Of course, instead of calling the
continuation in that case, you can do the equivalent work directly
inside the original function.)

Besides the Lua state, the continuation function has two other
parameters: the final status of the call and the context value (`ctx`)
that was passed originally to [`lua_pcallk`](#lua_pcallk). Lua does not
use this context value; it only passes this value from the original
function to the continuation function. For [`lua_pcallk`](#lua_pcallk),
the status is the same value that would be returned by
[`lua_pcallk`](#lua_pcallk), except that it is
[`LUA_YIELD`](#pdf-LUA_YIELD) when being executed after a yield (instead
of [`LUA_OK`](#pdf-LUA_OK)). For [`lua_yieldk`](#lua_yieldk) and
[`lua_callk`](#lua_callk), the status is always
[`LUA_YIELD`](#pdf-LUA_YIELD) when Lua calls the continuation. (For
these two functions, Lua will not call the continuation in case of
errors, because they do not handle errors.) Similarly, when using
[`lua_callk`](#lua_callk), you should call the continuation function
with [`LUA_OK`](#pdf-LUA_OK) as the status. (For
[`lua_yieldk`](#lua_yieldk), there is not much point in calling directly
the continuation function, because [`lua_yieldk`](#lua_yieldk) usually
does not return.)

Lua treats the continuation function as if it were the original
function. The continuation function receives the same Lua stack from the
original function, in the same state it would be if the callee function
had returned. (For instance, after a [`lua_callk`](#lua_callk) the
function and its arguments are removed from the stack and replaced by
the results from the call.) It also has the same upvalues. Whatever it
returns is handled by Lua as if it were the return of the original
function.

