# Functions and Types

Here we list all functions and types from the C API in alphabetical
order. Each function has an indicator like this: [\[-o, +p,
*x*\]]{.apii}

The first field, `o`, is how many elements the function pops from the
stack. The second field, `p`, is how many elements the function pushes
onto the stack. (Any function always pushes its results after popping
its arguments.) A field in the form `x|y` means the function can push
(or pop) `x` or `y` elements, depending on the situation; an
interrogation mark \'`?`\' means that we cannot know how many elements
the function pops/pushes by looking only at its arguments. (For
instance, they may depend on what is in the stack.) The third field,
`x`, tells whether the function may raise errors: \'`-`\' means the
function never raises any error; \'`m`\' means the function may raise
only out-of-memory errors; \'`v`\' means the function may raise the
errors explained in the text; \'`e`\' means the function can run
arbitrary Lua code, either directly or through metamethods, and
therefore may raise any errors.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_absindex`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    int lua_absindex (lua_State *L, int idx);

Converts the acceptable index `idx` into an equivalent absolute index
(that is, one that does not depend on the stack size).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_Alloc`

    typedef void * (*lua_Alloc) (void *ud,
                                 void *ptr,
                                 size_t osize,
                                 size_t nsize);

The type of the memory-allocation function used by Lua states. The
allocator function must provide a functionality similar to `realloc`,
but not exactly the same. Its arguments are `ud`, an opaque pointer
passed to [`lua_newstate`](#lua_newstate); `ptr`, a pointer to the block
being allocated/reallocated/freed; `osize`, the original size of the
block or some code about what is being allocated; and `nsize`, the new
size of the block.

When `ptr` is not `NULL`, `osize` is the size of the block pointed by
`ptr`, that is, the size given when it was allocated or reallocated.

When `ptr` is `NULL`, `osize` encodes the kind of object that Lua is
allocating. `osize` is any of [`LUA_TSTRING`](#pdf-LUA_TSTRING),
[`LUA_TTABLE`](#pdf-LUA_TTABLE), [`LUA_TFUNCTION`](#pdf-LUA_TFUNCTION),
[`LUA_TUSERDATA`](#pdf-LUA_TUSERDATA), or
[`LUA_TTHREAD`](#pdf-LUA_TTHREAD) when (and only when) Lua is creating a
new object of that type. When `osize` is some other value, Lua is
allocating memory for something else.

Lua assumes the following behavior from the allocator function:

When `nsize` is zero, the allocator must behave like `free` and then
return `NULL`.

When `nsize` is not zero, the allocator must behave like `realloc`. In
particular, the allocator returns `NULL` if and only if it cannot
fulfill the request.

Here is a simple implementation for the allocator function. It is used
in the auxiliary library by [`luaL_newstate`](#luaL_newstate).

         static void *l_alloc (void *ud, void *ptr, size_t osize,
                                                    size_t nsize) {
           (void)ud;  (void)osize;  /* not used */
           if (nsize == 0) {
             free(ptr);
             return NULL;
           }
           else
             return realloc(ptr, nsize);
         }

Note that Standard C ensures that `free(NULL)` has no effect and that
`realloc(NULL,size)` is equivalent to `malloc(size)`.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_arith`

[\[-(2\|1), +1, *e*\]]{.apii}

    void lua_arith (lua_State *L, int op);

Performs an arithmetic or bitwise operation over the two values (or one,
in the case of negations) at the top of the stack, with the value on the
top being the second operand, pops these values, and pushes the result
of the operation. The function follows the semantics of the
corresponding Lua operator (that is, it may call metamethods).

The value of `op` must be one of the following constants:

-   **[`LUA_OPADD`]{#pdf-LUA_OPADD}:** performs addition (`+`)
-   **[`LUA_OPSUB`]{#pdf-LUA_OPSUB}:** performs subtraction (`-`)
-   **[`LUA_OPMUL`]{#pdf-LUA_OPMUL}:** performs multiplication (`*`)
-   **[`LUA_OPDIV`]{#pdf-LUA_OPDIV}:** performs float division (`/`)
-   **[`LUA_OPIDIV`]{#pdf-LUA_OPIDIV}:** performs floor division (`//`)
-   **[`LUA_OPMOD`]{#pdf-LUA_OPMOD}:** performs modulo (`%`)
-   **[`LUA_OPPOW`]{#pdf-LUA_OPPOW}:** performs exponentiation (`^`)
-   **[`LUA_OPUNM`]{#pdf-LUA_OPUNM}:** performs mathematical negation
    (unary `-`)
-   **[`LUA_OPBNOT`]{#pdf-LUA_OPBNOT}:** performs bitwise NOT (`~`)
-   **[`LUA_OPBAND`]{#pdf-LUA_OPBAND}:** performs bitwise AND (`&`)
-   **[`LUA_OPBOR`]{#pdf-LUA_OPBOR}:** performs bitwise OR (`|`)
-   **[`LUA_OPBXOR`]{#pdf-LUA_OPBXOR}:** performs bitwise exclusive OR
    (`~`)
-   **[`LUA_OPSHL`]{#pdf-LUA_OPSHL}:** performs left shift (`<<`)
-   **[`LUA_OPSHR`]{#pdf-LUA_OPSHR}:** performs right shift (`>>`)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_atpanic`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    lua_CFunction lua_atpanic (lua_State *L, lua_CFunction panicf);

Sets a new panic function and returns the old one (see [Error Handling in C](/04_API/ch04#error-handling-in-c)).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_call`

[\[-(nargs+1), +nresults, *e*\]]{.apii}

    void lua_call (lua_State *L, int nargs, int nresults);

Calls a function. Like regular Lua calls, `lua_call` respects the
`__call` metamethod. So, here the word \"function\" means any callable
value.

To do a call you must use the following protocol: first, the function to
be called is pushed onto the stack; then, the arguments to the call are
pushed in direct order; that is, the first argument is pushed first.
Finally you call [`lua_call`](#lua_call); `nargs` is the number of
arguments that you pushed onto the stack. When the function returns, all
arguments and the function value are popped and the call results are
pushed onto the stack. The number of results is adjusted to `nresults`,
unless `nresults` is [`LUA_MULTRET`]{#pdf-LUA_MULTRET}. In this case,
all results from the function are pushed; Lua takes care that the
returned values fit into the stack space, but it does not ensure any
extra space in the stack. The function results are pushed onto the stack
in direct order (the first result is pushed first), so that after the
call the last result is on the top of the stack.

Any error while calling and running the function is propagated upwards
(with a `longjmp`).

The following example shows how the host program can do the equivalent
to this Lua code:

         a = f("how", t.x, 14)

Here it is in C:

         lua_getglobal(L, "f");                  /* function to be called */
         lua_pushliteral(L, "how");                       /* 1st argument */
         lua_getglobal(L, "t");                    /* table to be indexed */
         lua_getfield(L, -1, "x");        /* push result of t.x (2nd arg) */
         lua_remove(L, -2);                  /* remove 't' from the stack */
         lua_pushinteger(L, 14);                          /* 3rd argument */
         lua_call(L, 3, 1);     /* call 'f' with 3 arguments and 1 result */
         lua_setglobal(L, "a");                         /* set global 'a' */

Note that the code above is *balanced*: at its end, the stack is back to
its original configuration. This is considered good programming
practice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_callk`

[\[-(nargs + 1), +nresults, *e*\]]{.apii}

    void lua_callk (lua_State *L,
                    int nargs,
                    int nresults,
                    lua_KContext ctx,
                    lua_KFunction k);

This function behaves exactly like [`lua_call`](#lua_call), but allows
the called function to yield (see [Handling Yields in C](/04_API/ch05#handling-yields-in-c)).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_CFunction`

    typedef int (*lua_CFunction) (lua_State *L);

Type for C functions.

In order to communicate properly with Lua, a C function must use the
following protocol, which defines the way parameters and results are
passed: a C function receives its arguments from Lua in its stack in
direct order (the first argument is pushed first). So, when the function
starts, `lua_gettop(L)` returns the number of arguments received by the
function. The first argument (if any) is at index 1 and its last
argument is at index `lua_gettop(L)`. To return values to Lua, a
C function just pushes them onto the stack, in direct order (the first
result is pushed first), and returns in C the number of results. Any
other value in the stack below the results will be properly discarded by
Lua. Like a Lua function, a C function called by Lua can also return
many results.

As an example, the following function receives a variable number of
numeric arguments and returns their average and their sum:

         static int foo (lua_State *L) {
           int n = lua_gettop(L);    /* number of arguments */
           lua_Number sum = 0.0;
           int i;
           for (i = 1; i <= n; i++) {
             if (!lua_isnumber(L, i)) {
               lua_pushliteral(L, "incorrect argument");
               lua_error(L);
             }
             sum += lua_tonumber(L, i);
           }
           lua_pushnumber(L, sum/n);        /* first result */
           lua_pushnumber(L, sum);         /* second result */
           return 2;                   /* number of results */
         }

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_checkstack`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    int lua_checkstack (lua_State *L, int n);

Ensures that the stack has space for at least `n` extra elements, that
is, that you can safely push up to `n` values into it. It returns false
if it cannot fulfill the request, either because it would cause the
stack to be greater than a fixed maximum size (typically at least
several thousand elements) or because it cannot allocate memory for the
extra space. This function never shrinks the stack; if the stack already
has space for the extra elements, it is left unchanged.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_close`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    void lua_close (lua_State *L);

Close all active to-be-closed variables in the main thread, release all
objects in the given Lua state (calling the corresponding
garbage-collection metamethods, if any), and frees all dynamic memory
used by this state.

On several platforms, you may not need to call this function, because
all resources are naturally released when the host program ends. On the
other hand, long-running programs that create multiple states, such as
daemons or web servers, will probably need to close states as soon as
they are not needed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_closeslot`

[\[-0, +0, *e*\]]{.apii}

    void lua_closeslot (lua_State *L, int index);

Close the to-be-closed slot at the given index and set its value to
**nil**. The index must be the last index previously marked to be closed
(see [`lua_toclose`](#lua_toclose)) that is still active (that is, not
closed yet).

A `__close` metamethod cannot yield when called through this function.

(Exceptionally, this function was introduced in release 5.4.3. It is not
present in previous 5.4 releases.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_compare`

[\[-0, +0, *e*\]]{.apii}

    int lua_compare (lua_State *L, int index1, int index2, int op);

Compares two Lua values. Returns 1 if the value at index `index1`
satisfies `op` when compared with the value at index `index2`, following
the semantics of the corresponding Lua operator (that is, it may call
metamethods). Otherwise returns 0. Also returns 0 if any of the indices
is not valid.

The value of `op` must be one of the following constants:

-   **[`LUA_OPEQ`]{#pdf-LUA_OPEQ}:** compares for equality (`==`)
-   **[`LUA_OPLT`]{#pdf-LUA_OPLT}:** compares for less than (`<`)
-   **[`LUA_OPLE`]{#pdf-LUA_OPLE}:** compares for less or equal (`<=`)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_concat`

[\[-n, +1, *e*\]]{.apii}

    void lua_concat (lua_State *L, int n);

Concatenates the `n` values at the top of the stack, pops them, and
leaves the result on the top. If `n` is 1, the result is the single
value on the stack (that is, the function does nothing); if `n` is 0,
the result is the empty string. Concatenation is performed following the
usual semantics of Lua (see [Concatenation](/03_the_language/ch04#concatenation)).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_copy`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    void lua_copy (lua_State *L, int fromidx, int toidx);

Copies the element at index `fromidx` into the valid index `toidx`,
replacing the value at that position. Values at other positions are not
affected.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_createtable`

[\[-0, +1, *m*\]]{.apii}

    void lua_createtable (lua_State *L, int narr, int nrec);

Creates a new empty table and pushes it onto the stack. Parameter `narr`
is a hint for how many elements the table will have as a sequence;
parameter `nrec` is a hint for how many other elements the table will
have. Lua may use these hints to preallocate memory for the new table.
This preallocation may help performance when you know in advance how
many elements the table will have. Otherwise you can use the function
[`lua_newtable`](#lua_newtable).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_dump`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    int lua_dump (lua_State *L,
                            lua_Writer writer,
                            void *data,
                            int strip);

Dumps a function as a binary chunk. Receives a Lua function on the top
of the stack and produces a binary chunk that, if loaded again, results
in a function equivalent to the one dumped. As it produces parts of the
chunk, [`lua_dump`](#lua_dump) calls function `writer` (see
[`lua_Writer`](#lua_Writer)) with the given `data` to write them.

If `strip` is true, the binary representation may not include all debug
information about the function, to save space.

The value returned is the error code returned by the last call to the
writer; 0 means no errors.

This function does not pop the Lua function from the stack.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_error`

[\[-1, +0, *v*\]]{.apii}

    int lua_error (lua_State *L);

Raises a Lua error, using the value on the top of the stack as the error
object. This function does a long jump, and therefore never returns (see
[`luaL_error`](#luaL_error)).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_gc`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    int lua_gc (lua_State *L, int what, ...);

Controls the garbage collector.

This function performs several tasks, according to the value of the
parameter `what`. For options that need extra arguments, they are listed
after the option.

-   **`LUA_GCCOLLECT`:** Performs a full garbage-collection cycle.
-   **`LUA_GCSTOP`:** Stops the garbage collector.
-   **`LUA_GCRESTART`:** Restarts the garbage collector.
-   **`LUA_GCCOUNT`:** Returns the current amount of memory (in Kbytes)
    in use by Lua.
-   **`LUA_GCCOUNTB`:** Returns the remainder of dividing the current
    amount of bytes of memory in use by Lua by 1024.
-   **`LUA_GCSTEP` `(int stepsize)`:** Performs an incremental step of
    garbage collection, corresponding to the allocation of `stepsize`
    Kbytes.
-   **`LUA_GCISRUNNING`:** Returns a boolean that tells whether the
    collector is running (i.e., not stopped).
-   **`LUA_GCINC` (int pause, int stepmul, stepsize):** Changes the
    collector to incremental mode with the given parameters (see
    [Incremental Garbage Collection](/02_basic_concepts/ch05#incremental-garbage-collection)). Returns the previous mode (`LUA_GCGEN` or
    `LUA_GCINC`).
-   **`LUA_GCGEN` (int minormul, int majormul):** Changes the collector
    to generational mode with the given parameters (see
    [Generational Garbage Collection](/02_basic_concepts/ch05#generational-garbage-collection)). Returns the previous mode (`LUA_GCGEN` or
    `LUA_GCINC`).

For more details about these options, see
[`collectgarbage`](#pdf-collectgarbage).

This function should not be called by a finalizer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_getallocf`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    lua_Alloc lua_getallocf (lua_State *L, void **ud);

Returns the memory-allocation function of a given state. If `ud` is not
`NULL`, Lua stores in `*ud` the opaque pointer given when the
memory-allocator function was set.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_getfield`

[\[-0, +1, *e*\]]{.apii}

    int lua_getfield (lua_State *L, int index, const char *k);

Pushes onto the stack the value `t[k]`, where `t` is the value at the
given index. As in Lua, this function may trigger a metamethod for the
\"index\" event (see [Metatables and Metamethods](/02_basic_concepts/ch04#metatables-and-metamethods)).

Returns the type of the pushed value.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_getextraspace`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    void *lua_getextraspace (lua_State *L);

Returns a pointer to a raw memory area associated with the given Lua
state. The application can use this area for any purpose; Lua does not
use it for anything.

Each new thread has this area initialized with a copy of the area of the
main thread.

By default, this area has the size of a pointer to void, but you can
recompile Lua with a different size for this area. (See `LUA_EXTRASPACE`
in `luaconf.h`.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_getglobal`

[\[-0, +1, *e*\]]{.apii}

    int lua_getglobal (lua_State *L, const char *name);

Pushes onto the stack the value of the global `name`. Returns the type
of that value.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_geti`

[\[-0, +1, *e*\]]{.apii}

    int lua_geti (lua_State *L, int index, lua_Integer i);

Pushes onto the stack the value `t[i]`, where `t` is the value at the
given index. As in Lua, this function may trigger a metamethod for the
\"index\" event (see [Metatables and Metamethods](/02_basic_concepts/ch04#metatables-and-metamethods)).

Returns the type of the pushed value.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_getmetatable`

[\[-0, +(0\|1), --\]]{.apii}

    int lua_getmetatable (lua_State *L, int index);

If the value at the given index has a metatable, the function pushes
that metatable onto the stack and returns 1. Otherwise, the function
returns 0 and pushes nothing on the stack.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_gettable`

[\[-1, +1, *e*\]]{.apii}

    int lua_gettable (lua_State *L, int index);

Pushes onto the stack the value `t[k]`, where `t` is the value at the
given index and `k` is the value on the top of the stack.

This function pops the key from the stack, pushing the resulting value
in its place. As in Lua, this function may trigger a metamethod for the
\"index\" event (see [Metatables and Metamethods](/02_basic_concepts/ch04#metatables-and-metamethods)).

Returns the type of the pushed value.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_gettop`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    int lua_gettop (lua_State *L);

Returns the index of the top element in the stack. Because indices start
at 1, this result is equal to the number of elements in the stack; in
particular, 0 means an empty stack.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_getiuservalue`

[\[-0, +1, --\]]{.apii}

    int lua_getiuservalue (lua_State *L, int index, int n);

Pushes onto the stack the `n`-th user value associated with the full
userdata at the given index and returns the type of the pushed value.

If the userdata does not have that value, pushes **nil** and returns
[`LUA_TNONE`](#pdf-LUA_TNONE).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_insert`

[\[-1, +1, --\]]{.apii}

    void lua_insert (lua_State *L, int index);

Moves the top element into the given valid index, shifting up the
elements above this index to open space. This function cannot be called
with a pseudo-index, because a pseudo-index is not an actual stack
position.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_Integer`

    typedef ... lua_Integer;

The type of integers in Lua.

By default this type is `long long`, (usually a 64-bit two-complement
integer), but that can be changed to `long` or `int` (usually a 32-bit
two-complement integer). (See `LUA_INT_TYPE` in `luaconf.h`.)

Lua also defines the constants [`LUA_MININTEGER`]{#pdf-LUA_MININTEGER}
and [`LUA_MAXINTEGER`]{#pdf-LUA_MAXINTEGER}, with the minimum and the
maximum values that fit in this type.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_isboolean`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    int lua_isboolean (lua_State *L, int index);

Returns 1 if the value at the given index is a boolean, and 0 otherwise.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_iscfunction`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    int lua_iscfunction (lua_State *L, int index);

Returns 1 if the value at the given index is a C function, and
0 otherwise.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_isfunction`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    int lua_isfunction (lua_State *L, int index);

Returns 1 if the value at the given index is a function (either C or
Lua), and 0 otherwise.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_isinteger`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    int lua_isinteger (lua_State *L, int index);

Returns 1 if the value at the given index is an integer (that is, the
value is a number and is represented as an integer), and 0 otherwise.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_islightuserdata`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    int lua_islightuserdata (lua_State *L, int index);

Returns 1 if the value at the given index is a light userdata, and
0 otherwise.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_isnil`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    int lua_isnil (lua_State *L, int index);

Returns 1 if the value at the given index is **nil**, and 0 otherwise.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_isnone`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    int lua_isnone (lua_State *L, int index);

Returns 1 if the given index is not valid, and 0 otherwise.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_isnoneornil`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    int lua_isnoneornil (lua_State *L, int index);

Returns 1 if the given index is not valid or if the value at this index
is **nil**, and 0 otherwise.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_isnumber`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    int lua_isnumber (lua_State *L, int index);

Returns 1 if the value at the given index is a number or a string
convertible to a number, and 0 otherwise.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_isstring`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    int lua_isstring (lua_State *L, int index);

Returns 1 if the value at the given index is a string or a number (which
is always convertible to a string), and 0 otherwise.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_istable`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    int lua_istable (lua_State *L, int index);

Returns 1 if the value at the given index is a table, and 0 otherwise.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_isthread`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    int lua_isthread (lua_State *L, int index);

Returns 1 if the value at the given index is a thread, and 0 otherwise.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_isuserdata`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    int lua_isuserdata (lua_State *L, int index);

Returns 1 if the value at the given index is a userdata (either full or
light), and 0 otherwise.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_isyieldable`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    int lua_isyieldable (lua_State *L);

Returns 1 if the given coroutine can yield, and 0 otherwise.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_KContext`

    typedef ... lua_KContext;

The type for continuation-function contexts. It must be a numeric type.
This type is defined as `intptr_t` when `intptr_t` is available, so that
it can store pointers too. Otherwise, it is defined as `ptrdiff_t`.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_KFunction`

    typedef int (*lua_KFunction) (lua_State *L, int status, lua_KContext ctx);

Type for continuation functions (see [Handling Yields in C](/04_API/ch05#handling-yields-in-c)).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_len`

[\[-0, +1, *e*\]]{.apii}

    void lua_len (lua_State *L, int index);

Returns the length of the value at the given index. It is equivalent to
the \'`#`\' operator in Lua (see [The Length Operator](/03_the_language/ch04#the-length-operator)) and may trigger a
metamethod for the \"length\" event (see [Metatables and Metamethods](/02_basic_concepts/ch04#metatables-and-metamethods)). The result is
pushed on the stack.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_load`

[\[-0, +1, --\]]{.apii}

    int lua_load (lua_State *L,
                  lua_Reader reader,
                  void *data,
                  const char *chunkname,
                  const char *mode);

Loads a Lua chunk without running it. If there are no errors, `lua_load`
pushes the compiled chunk as a Lua function on top of the stack.
Otherwise, it pushes an error message.

The `lua_load` function uses a user-supplied `reader` function to read
the chunk (see [`lua_Reader`](#lua_Reader)). The `data` argument is an
opaque value passed to the reader function.

The `chunkname` argument gives a name to the chunk, which is used for
error messages and in debug information (see [The Debug Interface](/04_API/ch07#the-debug-interface)).

`lua_load` automatically detects whether the chunk is text or binary and
loads it accordingly (see program `luac`). The string `mode` works as in
function [`load`](#pdf-load), with the addition that a `NULL` value is
equivalent to the string \"`bt`\".

`lua_load` uses the stack internally, so the reader function must always
leave the stack unmodified when returning.

`lua_load` can return [`LUA_OK`](#pdf-LUA_OK),
[`LUA_ERRSYNTAX`](#pdf-LUA_ERRSYNTAX), or
[`LUA_ERRMEM`](#pdf-LUA_ERRMEM). The function may also return other
values corresponding to errors raised by the read function (see
[Status Codes](/04_API/ch04#status-codes)).

If the resulting function has upvalues, its first upvalue is set to the
value of the global environment stored at index `LUA_RIDX_GLOBALS` in
the registry (see [Registry](/04_API/ch03#registry)). When loading main chunks, this upvalue
will be the `_ENV` variable (see [Environments and the Global Environment](/02_basic_concepts/ch02#environments-and-the-global-environment)). Other upvalues are
initialized with **nil**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_newstate`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    lua_State *lua_newstate (lua_Alloc f, void *ud);

Creates a new independent state and returns its main thread. Returns
`NULL` if it cannot create the state (due to lack of memory). The
argument `f` is the allocator function; Lua will do all memory
allocation for this state through this function (see
[`lua_Alloc`](#lua_Alloc)). The second argument, `ud`, is an opaque
pointer that Lua passes to the allocator in every call.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_newtable`

[\[-0, +1, *m*\]]{.apii}

    void lua_newtable (lua_State *L);

Creates a new empty table and pushes it onto the stack. It is equivalent
to `lua_createtable(L, 0, 0)`.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_newthread`

[\[-0, +1, *m*\]]{.apii}

    lua_State *lua_newthread (lua_State *L);

Creates a new thread, pushes it on the stack, and returns a pointer to a
[`lua_State`](#lua_State) that represents this new thread. The new
thread returned by this function shares with the original thread its
global environment, but has an independent execution stack.

Threads are subject to garbage collection, like any Lua object.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_newuserdatauv`

[\[-0, +1, *m*\]]{.apii}

    void *lua_newuserdatauv (lua_State *L, size_t size, int nuvalue);

This function creates and pushes on the stack a new full userdata, with
`nuvalue` associated Lua values, called `user values`, plus an
associated block of raw memory with `size` bytes. (The user values can
be set and read with the functions
[`lua_setiuservalue`](#lua_setiuservalue) and
[`lua_getiuservalue`](#lua_getiuservalue).)

The function returns the address of the block of memory. Lua ensures
that this address is valid as long as the corresponding userdata is
alive (see [Garbage Collection](/02_basic_concepts/ch05#garbage-collection)). Moreover, if the userdata is marked for
finalization (see [Garbage-Collection Metamethods](/02_basic_concepts/ch05#garbage-collection-metamethods)), its address is valid at least until
the call to its finalizer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_next`

[\[-1, +(2\|0), *v*\]]{.apii}

    int lua_next (lua_State *L, int index);

Pops a key from the stack, and pushes a key--value pair from the table
at the given index, the \"next\" pair after the given key. If there are
no more elements in the table, then [`lua_next`](#lua_next) returns 0
and pushes nothing.

A typical table traversal looks like this:

         /* table is in the stack at index 't' */
         lua_pushnil(L);  /* first key */
         while (lua_next(L, t) != 0) {
           /* uses 'key' (at index -2) and 'value' (at index -1) */
           printf("%s - %s\n",
                  lua_typename(L, lua_type(L, -2)),
                  lua_typename(L, lua_type(L, -1)));
           /* removes 'value'; keeps 'key' for next iteration */
           lua_pop(L, 1);
         }

While traversing a table, avoid calling
[`lua_tolstring`](#lua_tolstring) directly on a key, unless you know
that the key is actually a string. Recall that
[`lua_tolstring`](#lua_tolstring) may change the value at the given
index; this confuses the next call to [`lua_next`](#lua_next).

This function may raise an error if the given key is neither **nil** nor
present in the table. See function [`next`](#pdf-next) for the caveats
of modifying the table during its traversal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_Number`

    typedef ... lua_Number;

The type of floats in Lua.

By default this type is double, but that can be changed to a single
float or a long double. (See `LUA_FLOAT_TYPE` in `luaconf.h`.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_numbertointeger`

    int lua_numbertointeger (lua_Number n, lua_Integer *p);

Tries to convert a Lua float to a Lua integer; the float `n` must have
an integral value. If that value is within the range of Lua integers, it
is converted to an integer and assigned to `*p`. The macro results in a
boolean indicating whether the conversion was successful. (Note that
this range test can be tricky to do correctly without this macro, due to
rounding.)

This macro may evaluate its arguments more than once.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_pcall`

[\[-(nargs + 1), +(nresults\|1), --\]]{.apii}

    int lua_pcall (lua_State *L, int nargs, int nresults, int msgh);

Calls a function (or a callable object) in protected mode.

Both `nargs` and `nresults` have the same meaning as in
[`lua_call`](#lua_call). If there are no errors during the call,
[`lua_pcall`](#lua_pcall) behaves exactly like [`lua_call`](#lua_call).
However, if there is any error, [`lua_pcall`](#lua_pcall) catches it,
pushes a single value on the stack (the error object), and returns an
error code. Like [`lua_call`](#lua_call), [`lua_pcall`](#lua_pcall)
always removes the function and its arguments from the stack.

If `msgh` is 0, then the error object returned on the stack is exactly
the original error object. Otherwise, `msgh` is the stack index of a
*message handler*. (This index cannot be a pseudo-index.) In case of
runtime errors, this handler will be called with the error object and
its return value will be the object returned on the stack by
[`lua_pcall`](#lua_pcall).

Typically, the message handler is used to add more debug information to
the error object, such as a stack traceback. Such information cannot be
gathered after the return of [`lua_pcall`](#lua_pcall), since by then
the stack has unwound.

The [`lua_pcall`](#lua_pcall) function returns one of the following
status codes: [`LUA_OK`](#pdf-LUA_OK), [`LUA_ERRRUN`](#pdf-LUA_ERRRUN),
[`LUA_ERRMEM`](#pdf-LUA_ERRMEM), or [`LUA_ERRERR`](#pdf-LUA_ERRERR).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_pcallk`

[\[-(nargs + 1), +(nresults\|1), --\]]{.apii}

    int lua_pcallk (lua_State *L,
                    int nargs,
                    int nresults,
                    int msgh,
                    lua_KContext ctx,
                    lua_KFunction k);

This function behaves exactly like [`lua_pcall`](#lua_pcall), except
that it allows the called function to yield (see [Handling Yields in C](/04_API/ch05#handling-yields-in-c)).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_pop`

[\[-n, +0, *e*\]]{.apii}

    void lua_pop (lua_State *L, int n);

Pops `n` elements from the stack. It is implemented as a macro over
[`lua_settop`](#lua_settop).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_pushboolean`

[\[-0, +1, --\]]{.apii}

    void lua_pushboolean (lua_State *L, int b);

Pushes a boolean value with value `b` onto the stack.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_pushcclosure`

[\[-n, +1, *m*\]]{.apii}

    void lua_pushcclosure (lua_State *L, lua_CFunction fn, int n);

Pushes a new C closure onto the stack. This function receives a pointer
to a C function and pushes onto the stack a Lua value of type `function`
that, when called, invokes the corresponding C function. The parameter
`n` tells how many upvalues this function will have (see [C Closures](/04_API/ch02#c-closures)).

Any function to be callable by Lua must follow the correct protocol to
receive its parameters and return its results (see
[`lua_CFunction`](#lua_CFunction)).

When a C function is created, it is possible to associate some values
with it, the so called upvalues; these upvalues are then accessible to
the function whenever it is called. This association is called a
C closure (see [C Closures](/04_API/ch02#c-closures)). To create a C closure, first the initial
values for its upvalues must be pushed onto the stack. (When there are
multiple upvalues, the first value is pushed first.) Then
[`lua_pushcclosure`](#lua_pushcclosure) is called to create and push the
C function onto the stack, with the argument `n` telling how many values
will be associated with the function.
[`lua_pushcclosure`](#lua_pushcclosure) also pops these values from the
stack.

The maximum value for `n` is 255.

When `n` is zero, this function creates a *light C function*, which is
just a pointer to the C function. In that case, it never raises a memory
error.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_pushcfunction`

[\[-0, +1, --\]]{.apii}

    void lua_pushcfunction (lua_State *L, lua_CFunction f);

Pushes a C function onto the stack. This function is equivalent to
[`lua_pushcclosure`](#lua_pushcclosure) with no upvalues.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_pushfstring`

[\[-0, +1, *v*\]]{.apii}

    const char *lua_pushfstring (lua_State *L, const char *fmt, ...);

Pushes onto the stack a formatted string and returns a pointer to this
string (see [Pointers to strings](/04_API/ch01#pointers-to-strings)). It is similar to the ISO C function
`sprintf`, but has two important differences. First, you do not have to
allocate space for the result; the result is a Lua string and Lua takes
care of memory allocation (and deallocation, through garbage
collection). Second, the conversion specifiers are quite restricted.
There are no flags, widths, or precisions. The conversion specifiers can
only be \'`%%`\' (inserts the character \'`%`\'), \'`%s`\' (inserts a
zero-terminated string, with no size restrictions), \'`%f`\' (inserts a
[`lua_Number`](#lua_Number)), \'`%I`\' (inserts a
[`lua_Integer`](#lua_Integer)), \'`%p`\' (inserts a pointer), \'`%d`\'
(inserts an `int`), \'`%c`\' (inserts an `int` as a one-byte character),
and \'`%U`\' (inserts a `long int` as a UTF-8 byte sequence).

This function may raise errors due to memory overflow or an invalid
conversion specifier.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_pushglobaltable`

[\[-0, +1, --\]]{.apii}

    void lua_pushglobaltable (lua_State *L);

Pushes the global environment onto the stack.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_pushinteger`

[\[-0, +1, --\]]{.apii}

    void lua_pushinteger (lua_State *L, lua_Integer n);

Pushes an integer with value `n` onto the stack.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_pushlightuserdata`

[\[-0, +1, --\]]{.apii}

    void lua_pushlightuserdata (lua_State *L, void *p);

Pushes a light userdata onto the stack.

Userdata represent C values in Lua. A *light userdata* represents a
pointer, a `void*`. It is a value (like a number): you do not create it,
it has no individual metatable, and it is not collected (as it was never
created). A light userdata is equal to \"any\" light userdata with the
same C address.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_pushliteral`

[\[-0, +1, *m*\]]{.apii}

    const char *lua_pushliteral (lua_State *L, const char *s);

This macro is equivalent to [`lua_pushstring`](#lua_pushstring), but
should be used only when `s` is a literal string. (Lua may optimize this
case.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_pushlstring`

[\[-0, +1, *m*\]]{.apii}

    const char *lua_pushlstring (lua_State *L, const char *s, size_t len);

Pushes the string pointed to by `s` with size `len` onto the stack. Lua
will make or reuse an internal copy of the given string, so the memory
at `s` can be freed or reused immediately after the function returns.
The string can contain any binary data, including embedded zeros.

Returns a pointer to the internal copy of the string (see
[Pointers to strings](/04_API/ch01#pointers-to-strings)).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_pushnil`

[\[-0, +1, --\]]{.apii}

    void lua_pushnil (lua_State *L);

Pushes a nil value onto the stack.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_pushnumber`

[\[-0, +1, --\]]{.apii}

    void lua_pushnumber (lua_State *L, lua_Number n);

Pushes a float with value `n` onto the stack.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_pushstring`

[\[-0, +1, *m*\]]{.apii}

    const char *lua_pushstring (lua_State *L, const char *s);

Pushes the zero-terminated string pointed to by `s` onto the stack. Lua
will make or reuse an internal copy of the given string, so the memory
at `s` can be freed or reused immediately after the function returns.

Returns a pointer to the internal copy of the string (see
[Pointers to strings](/04_API/ch01#pointers-to-strings)).

If `s` is `NULL`, pushes **nil** and returns `NULL`.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_pushthread`

[\[-0, +1, --\]]{.apii}

    int lua_pushthread (lua_State *L);

Pushes the thread represented by `L` onto the stack. Returns 1 if this
thread is the main thread of its state.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_pushvalue`

[\[-0, +1, --\]]{.apii}

    void lua_pushvalue (lua_State *L, int index);

Pushes a copy of the element at the given index onto the stack.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_pushvfstring`

[\[-0, +1, *v*\]]{.apii}

    const char *lua_pushvfstring (lua_State *L,
                                  const char *fmt,
                                  va_list argp);

Equivalent to [`lua_pushfstring`](#lua_pushfstring), except that it
receives a `va_list` instead of a variable number of arguments.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_rawequal`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    int lua_rawequal (lua_State *L, int index1, int index2);

Returns 1 if the two values in indices `index1` and `index2` are
primitively equal (that is, equal without calling the `__eq`
metamethod). Otherwise returns 0. Also returns 0 if any of the indices
are not valid.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_rawget`

[\[-1, +1, --\]]{.apii}

    int lua_rawget (lua_State *L, int index);

Similar to [`lua_gettable`](#lua_gettable), but does a raw access (i.e.,
without metamethods).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_rawgeti`

[\[-0, +1, --\]]{.apii}

    int lua_rawgeti (lua_State *L, int index, lua_Integer n);

Pushes onto the stack the value `t[n]`, where `t` is the table at the
given index. The access is raw, that is, it does not use the `__index`
metavalue.

Returns the type of the pushed value.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_rawgetp`

[\[-0, +1, --\]]{.apii}

    int lua_rawgetp (lua_State *L, int index, const void *p);

Pushes onto the stack the value `t[k]`, where `t` is the table at the
given index and `k` is the pointer `p` represented as a light userdata.
The access is raw; that is, it does not use the `__index` metavalue.

Returns the type of the pushed value.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_rawlen`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    lua_Unsigned lua_rawlen (lua_State *L, int index);

Returns the raw \"length\" of the value at the given index: for strings,
this is the string length; for tables, this is the result of the length
operator (\'`#`\') with no metamethods; for userdata, this is the size
of the block of memory allocated for the userdata. For other values,
this call returns 0.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_rawset`

[\[-2, +0, *m*\]]{.apii}

    void lua_rawset (lua_State *L, int index);

Similar to [`lua_settable`](#lua_settable), but does a raw assignment
(i.e., without metamethods).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_rawseti`

[\[-1, +0, *m*\]]{.apii}

    void lua_rawseti (lua_State *L, int index, lua_Integer i);

Does the equivalent of `t[i] = v`, where `t` is the table at the given
index and `v` is the value on the top of the stack.

This function pops the value from the stack. The assignment is raw, that
is, it does not use the `__newindex` metavalue.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_rawsetp`

[\[-1, +0, *m*\]]{.apii}

    void lua_rawsetp (lua_State *L, int index, const void *p);

Does the equivalent of `t[p] = v`, where `t` is the table at the given
index, `p` is encoded as a light userdata, and `v` is the value on the
top of the stack.

This function pops the value from the stack. The assignment is raw, that
is, it does not use the `__newindex` metavalue.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_Reader`

    typedef const char * (*lua_Reader) (lua_State *L,
                                        void *data,
                                        size_t *size);

The reader function used by [`lua_load`](#lua_load). Every time
[`lua_load`](#lua_load) needs another piece of the chunk, it calls the
reader, passing along its `data` parameter. The reader must return a
pointer to a block of memory with a new piece of the chunk and set
`size` to the block size. The block must exist until the reader function
is called again. To signal the end of the chunk, the reader must return
`NULL` or set `size` to zero. The reader function may return pieces of
any size greater than zero.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_register`

[\[-0, +0, *e*\]]{.apii}

    void lua_register (lua_State *L, const char *name, lua_CFunction f);

Sets the C function `f` as the new value of global `name`. It is defined
as a macro:

         #define lua_register(L,n,f) \
                (lua_pushcfunction(L, f), lua_setglobal(L, n))

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_remove`

[\[-1, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    void lua_remove (lua_State *L, int index);

Removes the element at the given valid index, shifting down the elements
above this index to fill the gap. This function cannot be called with a
pseudo-index, because a pseudo-index is not an actual stack position.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_replace`

[\[-1, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    void lua_replace (lua_State *L, int index);

Moves the top element into the given valid index without shifting any
element (therefore replacing the value at that given index), and then
pops the top element.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_resetthread`

[\[-0, +?, --\]]{.apii}

    int lua_resetthread (lua_State *L);

Resets a thread, cleaning its call stack and closing all pending
to-be-closed variables. Returns a status code: [`LUA_OK`](#pdf-LUA_OK)
for no errors in the thread (either the original error that stopped the
thread or errors in closing methods), or an error status otherwise. In
case of error, leaves the error object on the top of the stack.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_resume`

[\[-?, +?, --\]]{.apii}

    int lua_resume (lua_State *L, lua_State *from, int nargs,
                              int *nresults);

Starts and resumes a coroutine in the given thread `L`.

To start a coroutine, you push the main function plus any arguments onto
the empty stack of the thread. then you call
[`lua_resume`](#lua_resume), with `nargs` being the number of arguments.
This call returns when the coroutine suspends or finishes its execution.
When it returns, `*nresults` is updated and the top of the stack
contains the `*nresults` values passed to [`lua_yield`](#lua_yield) or
returned by the body function. [`lua_resume`](#lua_resume) returns
[`LUA_YIELD`](#pdf-LUA_YIELD) if the coroutine yields,
[`LUA_OK`](#pdf-LUA_OK) if the coroutine finishes its execution without
errors, or an error code in case of errors (see [Status Codes](/04_API/ch04#status-codes)). In
case of errors, the error object is on the top of the stack.

To resume a coroutine, you remove the `*nresults` yielded values from
its stack, push the values to be passed as results from `yield`, and
then call [`lua_resume`](#lua_resume).

The parameter `from` represents the coroutine that is resuming `L`. If
there is no such coroutine, this parameter can be `NULL`.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_rotate`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    void lua_rotate (lua_State *L, int idx, int n);

Rotates the stack elements between the valid index `idx` and the top of
the stack. The elements are rotated `n` positions in the direction of
the top, for a positive `n`, or `-n` positions in the direction of the
bottom, for a negative `n`. The absolute value of `n` must not be
greater than the size of the slice being rotated. This function cannot
be called with a pseudo-index, because a pseudo-index is not an actual
stack position.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_setallocf`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    void lua_setallocf (lua_State *L, lua_Alloc f, void *ud);

Changes the allocator function of a given state to `f` with user data
`ud`.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_setfield`

[\[-1, +0, *e*\]]{.apii}

    void lua_setfield (lua_State *L, int index, const char *k);

Does the equivalent to `t[k] = v`, where `t` is the value at the given
index and `v` is the value on the top of the stack.

This function pops the value from the stack. As in Lua, this function
may trigger a metamethod for the \"newindex\" event (see [Metatables and Metamethods](/02_basic_concepts/ch04#metatables-and-metamethods)).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_setglobal`

[\[-1, +0, *e*\]]{.apii}

    void lua_setglobal (lua_State *L, const char *name);

Pops a value from the stack and sets it as the new value of global
`name`.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_seti`

[\[-1, +0, *e*\]]{.apii}

    void lua_seti (lua_State *L, int index, lua_Integer n);

Does the equivalent to `t[n] = v`, where `t` is the value at the given
index and `v` is the value on the top of the stack.

This function pops the value from the stack. As in Lua, this function
may trigger a metamethod for the \"newindex\" event (see [Metatables and Metamethods](/02_basic_concepts/ch04#metatables-and-metamethods)).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_setiuservalue`

[\[-1, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    int lua_setiuservalue (lua_State *L, int index, int n);

Pops a value from the stack and sets it as the new `n`-th user value
associated to the full userdata at the given index. Returns 0 if the
userdata does not have that value.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_setmetatable`

[\[-1, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    int lua_setmetatable (lua_State *L, int index);

Pops a table or **nil** from the stack and sets that value as the new
metatable for the value at the given index. (**nil** means no
metatable.)

(For historical reasons, this function returns an `int`, which now is
always 1.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_settable`

[\[-2, +0, *e*\]]{.apii}

    void lua_settable (lua_State *L, int index);

Does the equivalent to `t[k] = v`, where `t` is the value at the given
index, `v` is the value on the top of the stack, and `k` is the value
just below the top.

This function pops both the key and the value from the stack. As in Lua,
this function may trigger a metamethod for the \"newindex\" event (see
[Metatables and Metamethods](/02_basic_concepts/ch04#metatables-and-metamethods)).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_settop`

[\[-?, +?, *e*\]]{.apii}

    void lua_settop (lua_State *L, int index);

Accepts any index, or 0, and sets the stack top to this index. If the
new top is greater than the old one, then the new elements are filled
with **nil**. If `index` is 0, then all stack elements are removed.

This function can run arbitrary code when removing an index marked as
to-be-closed from the stack.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_setwarnf`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    void lua_setwarnf (lua_State *L, lua_WarnFunction f, void *ud);

Sets the warning function to be used by Lua to emit warnings (see
[`lua_WarnFunction`](#lua_WarnFunction)). The `ud` parameter sets the
value `ud` passed to the warning function.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_State`

    typedef struct lua_State lua_State;

An opaque structure that points to a thread and indirectly (through the
thread) to the whole state of a Lua interpreter. The Lua library is
fully reentrant: it has no global variables. All information about a
state is accessible through this structure.

A pointer to this structure must be passed as the first argument to
every function in the library, except to
[`lua_newstate`](#lua_newstate), which creates a Lua state from scratch.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_status`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    int lua_status (lua_State *L);

Returns the status of the thread `L`.

The status can be [`LUA_OK`](#pdf-LUA_OK) for a normal thread, an error
code if the thread finished the execution of a
[`lua_resume`](#lua_resume) with an error, or
[`LUA_YIELD`](#pdf-LUA_YIELD) if the thread is suspended.

You can call functions only in threads with status
[`LUA_OK`](#pdf-LUA_OK). You can resume threads with status
[`LUA_OK`](#pdf-LUA_OK) (to start a new coroutine) or
[`LUA_YIELD`](#pdf-LUA_YIELD) (to resume a coroutine).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_stringtonumber`

[\[-0, +1, --\]]{.apii}

    size_t lua_stringtonumber (lua_State *L, const char *s);

Converts the zero-terminated string `s` to a number, pushes that number
into the stack, and returns the total size of the string, that is, its
length plus one. The conversion can result in an integer or a float,
according to the lexical conventions of Lua (see [Lexical Conventions](/03_the_language/ch01#lexical-conventions)). The
string may have leading and trailing whitespaces and a sign. If the
string is not a valid numeral, returns 0 and pushes nothing. (Note that
the result can be used as a boolean, true if the conversion succeeds.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_toboolean`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    int lua_toboolean (lua_State *L, int index);

Converts the Lua value at the given index to a C boolean value (0 or 1).
Like all tests in Lua, [`lua_toboolean`](#lua_toboolean) returns true
for any Lua value different from **false** and **nil**; otherwise it
returns false. (If you want to accept only actual boolean values, use
[`lua_isboolean`](#lua_isboolean) to test the value\'s type.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_tocfunction`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    lua_CFunction lua_tocfunction (lua_State *L, int index);

Converts a value at the given index to a C function. That value must be
a C function; otherwise, returns `NULL`.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_toclose`

[\[-0, +0, *m*\]]{.apii}

    void lua_toclose (lua_State *L, int index);

Marks the given index in the stack as a to-be-closed slot (see
[To-be-closed Variables](/03_the_language/ch03#to-be-closed-variables)). Like a to-be-closed variable in Lua, the value at
that slot in the stack will be closed when it goes out of scope. Here,
in the context of a C function, to go out of scope means that the
running function returns to Lua, or there is an error, or the slot is
removed from the stack through [`lua_settop`](#lua_settop) or
[`lua_pop`](#lua_pop), or there is a call to
[`lua_closeslot`](#lua_closeslot). A slot marked as to-be-closed should
not be removed from the stack by any other function in the API except
[`lua_settop`](#lua_settop) or [`lua_pop`](#lua_pop), unless previously
deactivated by [`lua_closeslot`](#lua_closeslot).

This function should not be called for an index that is equal to or
below an active to-be-closed slot.

Note that, both in case of errors and of a regular return, by the time
the `__close` metamethod runs, the C stack was already unwound, so that
any automatic C variable declared in the calling function (e.g., a
buffer) will be out of scope.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_tointeger`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    lua_Integer lua_tointeger (lua_State *L, int index);

Equivalent to [`lua_tointegerx`](#lua_tointegerx) with `isnum` equal to
`NULL`.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_tointegerx`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    lua_Integer lua_tointegerx (lua_State *L, int index, int *isnum);

Converts the Lua value at the given index to the signed integral type
[`lua_Integer`](#lua_Integer). The Lua value must be an integer, or a
number or string convertible to an integer (see [Coercions and Conversions](/03_the_language/ch04#coercions-and-conversions));
otherwise, `lua_tointegerx` returns 0.

If `isnum` is not `NULL`, its referent is assigned a boolean value that
indicates whether the operation succeeded.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_tolstring`

[\[-0, +0, *m*\]]{.apii}

    const char *lua_tolstring (lua_State *L, int index, size_t *len);

Converts the Lua value at the given index to a C string. If `len` is not
`NULL`, it sets `*len` with the string length. The Lua value must be a
string or a number; otherwise, the function returns `NULL`. If the value
is a number, then `lua_tolstring` also *changes the actual value in the
stack to a string*. (This change confuses [`lua_next`](#lua_next) when
`lua_tolstring` is applied to keys during a table traversal.)

`lua_tolstring` returns a pointer to a string inside the Lua state (see
[Pointers to strings](/04_API/ch01#pointers-to-strings)). This string always has a zero (\'`\0`\') after its
last character (as in C), but can contain other zeros in its body.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_tonumber`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    lua_Number lua_tonumber (lua_State *L, int index);

Equivalent to [`lua_tonumberx`](#lua_tonumberx) with `isnum` equal to
`NULL`.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_tonumberx`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    lua_Number lua_tonumberx (lua_State *L, int index, int *isnum);

Converts the Lua value at the given index to the C type
[`lua_Number`](#lua_Number) (see [`lua_Number`](#lua_Number)). The Lua
value must be a number or a string convertible to a number (see
[Coercions and Conversions](/03_the_language/ch04#coercions-and-conversions)); otherwise, [`lua_tonumberx`](#lua_tonumberx)
returns 0.

If `isnum` is not `NULL`, its referent is assigned a boolean value that
indicates whether the operation succeeded.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_topointer`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    const void *lua_topointer (lua_State *L, int index);

Converts the value at the given index to a generic C pointer (`void*`).
The value can be a userdata, a table, a thread, a string, or a function;
otherwise, `lua_topointer` returns `NULL`. Different objects will give
different pointers. There is no way to convert the pointer back to its
original value.

Typically this function is used only for hashing and debug information.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_tostring`

[\[-0, +0, *m*\]]{.apii}

    const char *lua_tostring (lua_State *L, int index);

Equivalent to [`lua_tolstring`](#lua_tolstring) with `len` equal to
`NULL`.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_tothread`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    lua_State *lua_tothread (lua_State *L, int index);

Converts the value at the given index to a Lua thread (represented as
`lua_State*`). This value must be a thread; otherwise, the function
returns `NULL`.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_touserdata`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    void *lua_touserdata (lua_State *L, int index);

If the value at the given index is a full userdata, returns its
memory-block address. If the value is a light userdata, returns its
value (a pointer). Otherwise, returns `NULL`.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_type`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    int lua_type (lua_State *L, int index);

Returns the type of the value in the given valid index, or `LUA_TNONE`
for a non-valid but acceptable index. The types returned by
[`lua_type`](#lua_type) are coded by the following constants defined in
`lua.h`: [`LUA_TNIL`]{#pdf-LUA_TNIL}, [`LUA_TNUMBER`]{#pdf-LUA_TNUMBER},
[`LUA_TBOOLEAN`]{#pdf-LUA_TBOOLEAN}, [`LUA_TSTRING`]{#pdf-LUA_TSTRING},
[`LUA_TTABLE`]{#pdf-LUA_TTABLE}, [`LUA_TFUNCTION`]{#pdf-LUA_TFUNCTION},
[`LUA_TUSERDATA`]{#pdf-LUA_TUSERDATA},
[`LUA_TTHREAD`]{#pdf-LUA_TTHREAD}, and
[`LUA_TLIGHTUSERDATA`]{#pdf-LUA_TLIGHTUSERDATA}.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_typename`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    const char *lua_typename (lua_State *L, int tp);

Returns the name of the type encoded by the value `tp`, which must be
one the values returned by [`lua_type`](#lua_type).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_Unsigned`

    typedef ... lua_Unsigned;

The unsigned version of [`lua_Integer`](#lua_Integer).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_upvalueindex`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    int lua_upvalueindex (int i);

Returns the pseudo-index that represents the `i`-th upvalue of the
running function (see [C Closures](/04_API/ch02#c-closures)). `i` must be in the range
*\[1,256\]*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_version`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    lua_Number lua_version (lua_State *L);

Returns the version number of this core.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_WarnFunction`

    typedef void (*lua_WarnFunction) (void *ud, const char *msg, int tocont);

The type of warning functions, called by Lua to emit warnings. The first
parameter is an opaque pointer set by [`lua_setwarnf`](#lua_setwarnf).
The second parameter is the warning message. The third parameter is a
boolean that indicates whether the message is to be continued by the
message in the next call.

See [`warn`](#pdf-warn) for more details about warnings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_warning`

[\[-0, +0, --\]]{.apii}

    void lua_warning (lua_State *L, const char *msg, int tocont);

Emits a warning with the given message. A message in a call with
`tocont` true should be continued in another call to this function.

See [`warn`](#pdf-warn) for more details about warnings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_Writer`

    typedef int (*lua_Writer) (lua_State *L,
                               const void* p,
                               size_t sz,
                               void* ud);

The type of the writer function used by [`lua_dump`](#lua_dump). Every
time [`lua_dump`](#lua_dump) produces another piece of chunk, it calls
the writer, passing along the buffer to be written (`p`), its size
(`sz`), and the `ud` parameter supplied to [`lua_dump`](#lua_dump).

The writer returns an error code: 0 means no errors; any other value
means an error and stops [`lua_dump`](#lua_dump) from calling the writer
again.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_xmove`

[\[-?, +?, --\]]{.apii}

    void lua_xmove (lua_State *from, lua_State *to, int n);

Exchange values between different threads of the same state.

This function pops `n` values from the stack `from`, and pushes them
onto the stack `to`.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_yield`

[\[-?, +?, *v*\]]{.apii}

    int lua_yield (lua_State *L, int nresults);

This function is equivalent to [`lua_yieldk`](#lua_yieldk), but it has
no continuation (see [Handling Yields in C](/04_API/ch05#handling-yields-in-c)). Therefore, when the thread resumes,
it continues the function that called the function calling `lua_yield`.
To avoid surprises, this function should be called only in a tail call.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `lua_yieldk`

[\[-?, +?, *v*\]]{.apii}

    int lua_yieldk (lua_State *L,
                    int nresults,
                    lua_KContext ctx,
                    lua_KFunction k);

Yields a coroutine (thread).

When a C function calls [`lua_yieldk`](#lua_yieldk), the running
coroutine suspends its execution, and the call to
[`lua_resume`](#lua_resume) that started this coroutine returns. The
parameter `nresults` is the number of values from the stack that will be
passed as results to [`lua_resume`](#lua_resume).

When the coroutine is resumed again, Lua calls the given continuation
function `k` to continue the execution of the C function that yielded
(see [Handling Yields in C](/04_API/ch05#handling-yields-in-c)). This continuation function receives the same stack
from the previous function, with the `n` results removed and replaced by
the arguments passed to [`lua_resume`](#lua_resume). Moreover, the
continuation function receives the value `ctx` that was passed to
[`lua_yieldk`](#lua_yieldk).

Usually, this function does not return; when the coroutine eventually
resumes, it continues executing the continuation function. However,
there is one special case, which is when this function is called from
inside a line or a count hook (see [The Debug Interface](/04_API/ch07#the-debug-interface)). In that case,
`lua_yieldk` should be called with no continuation (probably in the form
of [`lua_yield`](#lua_yield)) and no results, and the hook should return
immediately after the call. Lua will yield and, when the coroutine
resumes again, it will continue the normal execution of the (Lua)
function that triggered the hook.

This function can raise an error if it is called from a thread with a
pending C call with no continuation function (what is called a *C-call
boundary*), or it is called from a thread that is not running inside a
resume (typically the main thread).

