# Basic Functions

The basic library provides core functions to Lua. If you do not include
this library in your application, you should check carefully whether you
need to provide implementations for some of its facilities.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `assert (v [, message])`

Raises an error if the value of its argument `v` is false (i.e., **nil**
or **false**); otherwise, returns all its arguments. In case of error,
`message` is the error object; when absent, it defaults to
\"`assertion failed!`\"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `collectgarbage ([opt [, arg]])`

This function is a generic interface to the garbage collector. It
performs different functions according to its first argument, `opt`:

-   **\"`collect`\":** Performs a full garbage-collection cycle. This is
    the default option.
-   **\"`stop`\":** Stops automatic execution of the garbage collector.
    The collector will run only when explicitly invoked, until a call to
    restart it.
-   **\"`restart`\":** Restarts automatic execution of the garbage
    collector.
-   **\"`count`\":** Returns the total memory in use by Lua in Kbytes.
    The value has a fractional part, so that it multiplied by 1024 gives
    the exact number of bytes in use by Lua.
-   **\"`step`\":** Performs a garbage-collection step. The step
    \"size\" is controlled by `arg`. With a zero value, the collector
    will perform one basic (indivisible) step. For non-zero values, the
    collector will perform as if that amount of memory (in Kbytes) had
    been allocated by Lua. Returns **true** if the step finished a
    collection cycle.
-   **\"`isrunning`\":** Returns a boolean that tells whether the
    collector is running (i.e., not stopped).
-   **\"`incremental`\":** Change the collector mode to incremental.
    This option can be followed by three numbers: the garbage-collector
    pause, the step multiplier, and the step size (see
    [Incremental Garbage Collection](/02_basic_concepts/ch05#incremental-garbage-collection)). A zero means to not change that value.
-   **\"`generational`\":** Change the collector mode to generational.
    This option can be followed by two numbers: the garbage-collector
    minor multiplier and the major multiplier (see [Generational Garbage Collection](/02_basic_concepts/ch05#generational-garbage-collection)). A
    zero means to not change that value.

See [Garbage Collection](/02_basic_concepts/ch05#garbage-collection) for more details about garbage collection and some of
these options.

This function should not be called by a finalizer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `dofile ([filename])`

Opens the named file and executes its content as a Lua chunk. When
called without arguments, `dofile` executes the content of the standard
input (`stdin`). Returns all values returned by the chunk. In case of
errors, `dofile` propagates the error to its caller. (That is, `dofile`
does not run in protected mode.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `error (message [, level])`

Raises an error (see [Error Handling](/02_basic_concepts/ch03#error-handling)) with `message` as the error object.
This function never returns.

Usually, `error` adds some information about the error position at the
beginning of the message, if the message is a string. The `level`
argument specifies how to get the error position. With level 1 (the
default), the error position is where the `error` function was called.
Level 2 points the error to where the function that called `error` was
called; and so on. Passing a level 0 avoids the addition of error
position information to the message.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `_G`

A global variable (not a function) that holds the global environment
(see [Environments and the Global Environment](/02_basic_concepts/ch02#environments-and-the-global-environment)). Lua itself does not use this variable; changing its
value does not affect any environment, nor vice versa.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `getmetatable (object)`

If `object` does not have a metatable, returns **nil**. Otherwise, if
the object\'s metatable has a `__metatable` field, returns the
associated value. Otherwise, returns the metatable of the given object.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `ipairs (t)`

Returns three values (an iterator function, the table `t`, and 0) so
that the construction

         for i,v in ipairs(t) do body end

will iterate over the key--value pairs (`1,t[1]`), (`2,t[2]`), \..., up
to the first absent index.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `load (chunk [, chunkname [, mode [, env]]])`

Loads a chunk.

If `chunk` is a string, the chunk is this string. If `chunk` is a
function, `load` calls it repeatedly to get the chunk pieces. Each call
to `chunk` must return a string that concatenates with previous results.
A return of an empty string, **nil**, or no value signals the end of the
chunk.

If there are no syntactic errors, `load` returns the compiled chunk as a
function; otherwise, it returns **fail** plus the error message.

When you load a main chunk, the resulting function will always have
exactly one upvalue, the `_ENV` variable (see [Environments and the Global Environment](/02_basic_concepts/ch02#environments-and-the-global-environment)). However,
when you load a binary chunk created from a function (see
[`string.dump`]( /06_standard_lib/ch04#string-dump-function-strip)), the resulting function can have an
arbitrary number of upvalues, and there is no guarantee that its first
upvalue will be the `_ENV` variable. (A non-main function may not even
have an `_ENV` upvalue.)

Regardless, if the resulting function has any upvalues, its first
upvalue is set to the value of `env`, if that parameter is given, or to
the value of the global environment. Other upvalues are initialized with
**nil**. All upvalues are fresh, that is, they are not shared with any
other function.

`chunkname` is used as the name of the chunk for error messages and
debug information (see [The Debug Interface](/04_API/ch07#the-debug-interface)). When absent, it defaults to
`chunk`, if `chunk` is a string, or to \"`=(load)`\" otherwise.

The string `mode` controls whether the chunk can be text or binary (that
is, a precompiled chunk). It may be the string \"`b`\" (only binary
chunks), \"`t`\" (only text chunks), or \"`bt`\" (both binary and text).
The default is \"`bt`\".

It is safe to load malformed binary chunks; `load` signals an
appropriate error. However, Lua does not check the consistency of the
code inside binary chunks; running maliciously crafted bytecode can
crash the interpreter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `loadfile ([filename [, mode [, env]]])`

Similar to [`load`]( /06_standard_lib/ch01#load-chunk-chunkname-mode-env), but gets the chunk from file `filename`
or from the standard input, if no file name is given.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `next (table [, index])`

Allows a program to traverse all fields of a table. Its first argument
is a table and its second argument is an index in this table. A call to
`next` returns the next index of the table and its associated value.
When called with **nil** as its second argument, `next` returns an
initial index and its associated value. When called with the last index,
or with **nil** in an empty table, `next` returns **nil**. If the second
argument is absent, then it is interpreted as **nil**. In particular,
you can use `next(t)` to check whether a table is empty.

The order in which the indices are enumerated is not specified, *even
for numeric indices*. (To traverse a table in numerical order, use a
numerical **for**.)

You should not assign any value to a non-existent field in a table
during its traversal. You may however modify existing fields. In
particular, you may set existing fields to nil.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `pairs (t)`

If `t` has a metamethod `__pairs`, calls it with `t` as argument and
returns the first three results from the call.

Otherwise, returns three values: the [`next`]( /06_standard_lib/ch01#next-table-index) function, the
table `t`, and **nil**, so that the construction

         for k,v in pairs(t) do body end

will iterate over all key--value pairs of table `t`.

See function [`next`]( /06_standard_lib/ch01#next-table-index) for the caveats of modifying the table
during its traversal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `pcall (f [, arg1, ···])`

Calls the function `f` with the given arguments in *protected mode*.
This means that any error inside `f` is not propagated; instead, `pcall`
catches the error and returns a status code. Its first result is the
status code (a boolean), which is **true** if the call succeeds without
errors. In such case, `pcall` also returns all results from the call,
after this first result. In case of any error, `pcall` returns **false**
plus the error object. Note that errors caught by `pcall` do not call a
message handler.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `print (···)`

Receives any number of arguments and prints their values to `stdout`,
converting each argument to a string following the same rules of
[`tostring`]( /06_standard_lib/ch01#tostring-v).

The function `print` is not intended for formatted output, but only as a
quick way to show a value, for instance for debugging. For complete
control over the output, use [`string.format`]( /06_standard_lib/ch04#string-format-formatstring-···) and
[`io.write`]( /06_standard_lib/ch08#io-write-···).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `rawequal (v1, v2)`

Checks whether `v1` is equal to `v2`, without invoking the `__eq`
metamethod. Returns a boolean.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `rawget (table, index)`

Gets the real value of `table[index]`, without using the `__index`
metavalue. `table` must be a table; `index` may be any value.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `rawlen (v)`

Returns the length of the object `v`, which must be a table or a string,
without invoking the `__len` metamethod. Returns an integer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `rawset (table, index, value)`

Sets the real value of `table[index]` to `value`, without using the
`__newindex` metavalue. `table` must be a table, `index` any value
different from **nil** and NaN, and `value` any Lua value.

This function returns `table`.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `select (index, ···)`

If `index` is a number, returns all arguments after argument number
`index`; a negative number indexes from the end (-1 is the last
argument). Otherwise, `index` must be the string `"#"`, and `select`
returns the total number of extra arguments it received.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `setmetatable (table, metatable)`

Sets the metatable for the given table. If `metatable` is **nil**,
removes the metatable of the given table. If the original metatable has
a `__metatable` field, raises an error.

This function returns `table`.

To change the metatable of other types from Lua code, you must use the
debug library ([The Debug Library](/06_standard_lib/ch01#the-debug-library)).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `tonumber (e [, base])`

When called with no `base`, `tonumber` tries to convert its argument to
a number. If the argument is already a number or a string convertible to
a number, then `tonumber` returns this number; otherwise, it returns
**fail**.

The conversion of strings can result in integers or floats, according to
the lexical conventions of Lua (see [Lexical Conventions](/03_the_language/ch01#lexical-conventions)). The string may have
leading and trailing spaces and a sign.

When called with `base`, then `e` must be a string to be interpreted as
an integer numeral in that base. The base may be any integer between 2
and 36, inclusive. In bases above 10, the letter \'`A`\' (in either
upper or lower case) represents 10, \'`B`\' represents 11, and so forth,
with \'`Z`\' representing 35. If the string `e` is not a valid numeral
in the given base, the function returns **fail**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `tostring (v)`

Receives a value of any type and converts it to a string in a
human-readable format.

If the metatable of `v` has a `__tostring` field, then `tostring` calls
the corresponding value with `v` as argument, and uses the result of the
call as its result. Otherwise, if the metatable of `v` has a `__name`
field with a string value, `tostring` may use that string in its final
result.

For complete control of how numbers are converted, use
[`string.format`]( /06_standard_lib/ch04#string-format-formatstring-···).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `type (v)`

Returns the type of its only argument, coded as a string. The possible
results of this function are \"`nil`\" (a string, not the value
**nil**), \"`number`\", \"`string`\", \"`boolean`\", \"`table`\",
\"`function`\", \"`thread`\", and \"`userdata`\".

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `_VERSION`

A global variable (not a function) that holds a string containing the
running Lua version. The current value of this variable is
\"`Lua 5.4`\".

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `warn (msg1, ···)`

Emits a warning with a message composed by the concatenation of all its
arguments (which should be strings).

By convention, a one-piece message starting with \'`@`\' is intended to
be a *control message*, which is a message to the warning system itself.
In particular, the standard warning function in Lua recognizes the
control messages \"`@off`\", to stop the emission of warnings, and
\"`@on`\", to (re)start the emission; it ignores unknown control
messages.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `xpcall (f, msgh [, arg1, ···])`

This function is similar to [`pcall`]( /06_standard_lib/ch01#pcall-f-arg1-···), except that it sets a
new message handler `msgh`.

