# Coroutine Manipulation

This library comprises the operations to manipulate coroutines, which
come inside the table [`coroutine`]{#pdf-coroutine}. See [Coroutines](/02_basic_concepts/ch06#coroutines)
for a general description of coroutines.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `coroutine.close (co)`

Closes coroutine `co`, that is, closes all its pending to-be-closed
variables and puts the coroutine in a dead state. The given coroutine
must be dead or suspended. In case of error (either the original error
that stopped the coroutine or errors in closing methods), returns
**false** plus the error object; otherwise returns **true**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `coroutine.create (f)`

Creates a new coroutine, with body `f`. `f` must be a function. Returns
this new coroutine, an object with type `"thread"`.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `coroutine.isyieldable ([co])`

Returns **true** when the coroutine `co` can yield. The default for `co`
is the running coroutine.

A coroutine is yieldable if it is not the main thread and it is not
inside a non-yieldable C function.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `coroutine.resume (co [, val1, ···])`

Starts or continues the execution of coroutine `co`. The first time you
resume a coroutine, it starts running its body. The values `val1`, \...
are passed as the arguments to the body function. If the coroutine has
yielded, `resume` restarts it; the values `val1`, \... are passed as the
results from the yield.

If the coroutine runs without any errors, `resume` returns **true** plus
any values passed to `yield` (when the coroutine yields) or any values
returned by the body function (when the coroutine terminates). If there
is any error, `resume` returns **false** plus the error message.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `coroutine.running ()`

Returns the running coroutine plus a boolean, **true** when the running
coroutine is the main one.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `coroutine.status (co)`

Returns the status of the coroutine `co`, as a string: `"running"`, if
the coroutine is running (that is, it is the one that called `status`);
`"suspended"`, if the coroutine is suspended in a call to `yield`, or if
it has not started running yet; `"normal"` if the coroutine is active
but not running (that is, it has resumed another coroutine); and
`"dead"` if the coroutine has finished its body function, or if it has
stopped with an error.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `coroutine.wrap (f)`

Creates a new coroutine, with body `f`; `f` must be a function. Returns
a function that resumes the coroutine each time it is called. Any
arguments passed to this function behave as the extra arguments to
`resume`. The function returns the same values returned by `resume`,
except the first boolean. In case of error, the function closes the
coroutine and propagates the error.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `coroutine.yield (···)`

Suspends the execution of the calling coroutine. Any arguments to
`yield` are passed as extra results to `resume`.

