# Modules

The package library provides basic facilities for loading modules in
Lua. It exports one function directly in the global environment:
[`require`]( /06_standard_lib/ch03#require-modname). Everything else is exported in the table
[`package`]{#pdf-package}.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `require (modname)`

Loads the given module. The function starts by looking into the
[`package.loaded`]( /06_standard_lib/ch03#package-loaded) table to determine whether
`modname` is already loaded. If it is, then `require` returns the value
stored at `package.loaded[modname]`. (The absence of a second result in
this case signals that this call did not have to load the module.)
Otherwise, it tries to find a *loader* for the module.

To find a loader, `require` is guided by the table
[`package.searchers`]( /06_standard_lib/ch03#package-searchers). Each item in this table
is a search function, that searches for the module in a particular way.
By changing this table, we can change how `require` looks for a module.
The following explanation is based on the default configuration for
[`package.searchers`]( /06_standard_lib/ch03#package-searchers).

First `require` queries `package.preload[modname]`. If it has a value,
this value (which must be a function) is the loader. Otherwise `require`
searches for a Lua loader using the path stored in
[`package.path`]( /06_standard_lib/ch03#package-path). If that also fails, it searches for
a C loader using the path stored in
[`package.cpath`]( /06_standard_lib/ch03#package-cpath). If that also fails, it tries an
*all-in-one* loader (see [`package.searchers`]( /06_standard_lib/ch03#package-searchers)).

Once a loader is found, `require` calls the loader with two arguments:
`modname` and an extra value, a *loader data*, also returned by the
searcher. The loader data can be any value useful to the module; for the
default searchers, it indicates where the loader was found. (For
instance, if the loader came from a file, this extra value is the file
path.) If the loader returns any non-nil value, `require` assigns the
returned value to `package.loaded[modname]`. If the loader does not
return a non-nil value and has not assigned any value to
`package.loaded[modname]`, then `require` assigns **true** to this
entry. In any case, `require` returns the final value of
`package.loaded[modname]`. Besides that value, `require` also returns as
a second result the loader data returned by the searcher, which
indicates how `require` found the module.

If there is any error loading or running the module, or if it cannot
find any loader for the module, then `require` raises an error.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `package.config`

A string describing some compile-time configurations for packages. This
string is a sequence of lines:

-   The first line is the directory separator string. Default is \'`\`\'
    for Windows and \'`/`\' for all other systems.
-   The second line is the character that separates templates in a path.
    Default is \'`;`\'.
-   The third line is the string that marks the substitution points in a
    template. Default is \'`?`\'.
-   The fourth line is a string that, in a path in Windows, is replaced
    by the executable\'s directory. Default is \'`!`\'.
-   The fifth line is a mark to ignore all text after it when building
    the `luaopen_` function name. Default is \'`-`\'.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `package.cpath`

A string with the path used by [`require`]( /06_standard_lib/ch03#require-modname) to search for a
C loader.

Lua initializes the C path [`package.cpath`]( /06_standard_lib/ch03#package-cpath) in the
same way it initializes the Lua path
[`package.path`]( /06_standard_lib/ch03#package-path), using the environment variable
[`LUA_CPATH_5_4`]{#pdf-LUA_CPATH_5_4}, or the environment variable
[`LUA_CPATH`]{#pdf-LUA_CPATH}, or a default path defined in `luaconf.h`.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `package.loaded`

A table used by [`require`]( /06_standard_lib/ch03#require-modname) to control which modules are
already loaded. When you require a module `modname` and
`package.loaded[modname]` is not false, [`require`]( /06_standard_lib/ch03#require-modname) simply
returns the value stored there.

This variable is only a reference to the real table; assignments to this
variable do not change the table used by [`require`]( /06_standard_lib/ch03#require-modname).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `package.loadlib (libname, funcname)`

Dynamically links the host program with the C library `libname`.

If `funcname` is \"`*`\", then it only links with the library, making
the symbols exported by the library available to other dynamically
linked libraries. Otherwise, it looks for a function `funcname` inside
the library and returns this function as a C function. So, `funcname`
must follow the [`lua_CFunction`]( /04_API/ch06#lua-cfunction) prototype (see
[`lua_CFunction`]( /04_API/ch06#lua-cfunction)).

This is a low-level function. It completely bypasses the package and
module system. Unlike [`require`]( /06_standard_lib/ch03#require-modname), it does not perform any
path searching and does not automatically adds extensions. `libname`
must be the complete file name of the C library, including if necessary
a path and an extension. `funcname` must be the exact name exported by
the C library (which may depend on the C compiler and linker used).

This function is not supported by Standard C. As such, it is only
available on some platforms (Windows, Linux, Mac OS X, Solaris, BSD,
plus other Unix systems that support the `dlfcn` standard).

This function is inherently insecure, as it allows Lua to call any
function in any readable dynamic library in the system. (Lua calls any
function assuming the function has a proper prototype and respects a
proper protocol (see [`lua_CFunction`]( /04_API/ch06#lua-cfunction)). Therefore,
calling an arbitrary function in an arbitrary dynamic library more often
than not results in an access violation.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `package.path`

A string with the path used by [`require`]( /06_standard_lib/ch03#require-modname) to search for a
Lua loader.

At start-up, Lua initializes this variable with the value of the
environment variable [`LUA_PATH_5_4`]{#pdf-LUA_PATH_5_4} or the
environment variable [`LUA_PATH`]{#pdf-LUA_PATH} or with a default path
defined in `luaconf.h`, if those environment variables are not defined.
A \"`;;`\" in the value of the environment variable is replaced by the
default path.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `package.preload`

A table to store loaders for specific modules (see
[`require`]( /06_standard_lib/ch03#require-modname)).

This variable is only a reference to the real table; assignments to this
variable do not change the table used by [`require`]( /06_standard_lib/ch03#require-modname).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `package.searchers`

A table used by [`require`]( /06_standard_lib/ch03#require-modname) to control how to find
modules.

Each entry in this table is a *searcher function*. When looking for a
module, [`require`]( /06_standard_lib/ch03#require-modname) calls each of these searchers in
ascending order, with the module name (the argument given to
[`require`]( /06_standard_lib/ch03#require-modname)) as its sole argument. If the searcher finds
the module, it returns another function, the module *loader*, plus an
extra value, a *loader data*, that will be passed to that loader and
returned as a second result by [`require`]( /06_standard_lib/ch03#require-modname). If it cannot
find the module, it returns a string explaining why (or **nil** if it
has nothing to say).

Lua initializes this table with four searcher functions.

The first searcher simply looks for a loader in the
[`package.preload`]( /06_standard_lib/ch03#package-preload) table.

The second searcher looks for a loader as a Lua library, using the path
stored at [`package.path`]( /06_standard_lib/ch03#package-path). The search is done as
described in function [`package.searchpath`]( /06_standard_lib/ch03#package-searchpath-name-path-sep-rep).

The third searcher looks for a loader as a C library, using the path
given by the variable [`package.cpath`]( /06_standard_lib/ch03#package-cpath). Again, the
search is done as described in function
[`package.searchpath`]( /06_standard_lib/ch03#package-searchpath-name-path-sep-rep). For instance, if the
C path is the string

         "./?.so;./?.dll;/usr/local/?/init.so"

the searcher for module `foo` will try to open the files `./foo.so`,
`./foo.dll`, and `/usr/local/foo/init.so`, in that order. Once it finds
a C library, this searcher first uses a dynamic link facility to link
the application with the library. Then it tries to find a C function
inside the library to be used as the loader. The name of this C function
is the string \"`luaopen_`\" concatenated with a copy of the module name
where each dot is replaced by an underscore. Moreover, if the module
name has a hyphen, its suffix after (and including) the first hyphen is
removed. For instance, if the module name is `a.b.c-v2.1`, the function
name will be `luaopen_a_b_c`.

The fourth searcher tries an *all-in-one loader*. It searches the C path
for a library for the root name of the given module. For instance, when
requiring `a.b.c`, it will search for a C library for `a`. If found, it
looks into it for an open function for the submodule; in our example,
that would be `luaopen_a_b_c`. With this facility, a package can pack
several C submodules into one single library, with each submodule
keeping its original open function.

All searchers except the first one (preload) return as the extra value
the file path where the module was found, as returned by
[`package.searchpath`]( /06_standard_lib/ch03#package-searchpath-name-path-sep-rep). The first searcher
always returns the string \"`:preload:`\".

Searchers should raise no errors and have no side effects in Lua. (They
may have side effects in C, for instance by linking the application with
a library.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `package.searchpath (name, path [, sep [, rep]])`

Searches for the given `name` in the given `path`.

A path is a string containing a sequence of *templates* separated by
semicolons. For each template, the function replaces each interrogation
mark (if any) in the template with a copy of `name` wherein all
occurrences of `sep` (a dot, by default) were replaced by `rep` (the
system\'s directory separator, by default), and then tries to open the
resulting file name.

For instance, if the path is the string

         "./?.lua;./?.lc;/usr/local/?/init.lua"

the search for the name `foo.a` will try to open the files
`./foo/a.lua`, `./foo/a.lc`, and `/usr/local/foo/a/init.lua`, in that
order.

Returns the resulting name of the first file that it can open in read
mode (after closing the file), or **fail** plus an error message if none
succeeds. (This error message lists all file names it tried to open.)

