# String Manipulation

This library provides generic functions for string manipulation, such as
finding and extracting substrings, and pattern matching. When indexing a
string in Lua, the first character is at position 1 (not at 0, as in C).
Indices are allowed to be negative and are interpreted as indexing
backwards, from the end of the string. Thus, the last character is at
position -1, and so on.

The string library provides all its functions inside the table
[`string`]{#pdf-string}. It also sets a metatable for strings where the
`__index` field points to the `string` table. Therefore, you can use the
string functions in object-oriented style. For instance,
`string.byte(s,i)` can be written as `s:byte(i)`.

The string library assumes one-byte character encodings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `string.byte (s [, i [, j]])`

Returns the internal numeric codes of the characters `s[i]`, `s[i+1]`,
\..., `s[j]`. The default value for `i` is 1; the default value for `j`
is `i`. These indices are corrected following the same rules of function
[`string.sub`](#pdf-string.sub).

Numeric codes are not necessarily portable across platforms.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `string.char (···)`

Receives zero or more integers. Returns a string with length equal to
the number of arguments, in which each character has the internal
numeric code equal to its corresponding argument.

Numeric codes are not necessarily portable across platforms.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `string.dump (function [, strip])`

Returns a string containing a binary representation (a *binary chunk*)
of the given function, so that a later [`load`](#pdf-load) on this
string returns a copy of the function (but with new upvalues). If
`strip` is a true value, the binary representation may not include all
debug information about the function, to save space.

Functions with upvalues have only their number of upvalues saved. When
(re)loaded, those upvalues receive fresh instances. (See the
[`load`](#pdf-load) function for details about how these upvalues are
initialized. You can use the debug library to serialize and reload the
upvalues of a function in a way adequate to your needs.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `string.find (s, pattern [, init [, plain]])`

Looks for the first match of `pattern` (see [Patterns](/06_standard_lib/ch04#patterns)) in the
string `s`. If it finds a match, then `find` returns the indices of `s`
where this occurrence starts and ends; otherwise, it returns **fail**. A
third, optional numeric argument `init` specifies where to start the
search; its default value is 1 and can be negative. A **true** as a
fourth, optional argument `plain` turns off the pattern matching
facilities, so the function does a plain \"find substring\" operation,
with no characters in `pattern` being considered magic.

If the pattern has captures, then in a successful match the captured
values are also returned, after the two indices.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `string.format (formatstring, ···)`

Returns a formatted version of its variable number of arguments
following the description given in its first argument, which must be a
string. The format string follows the same rules as the ISO C function
`sprintf`. The only differences are that the conversion specifiers and
modifiers `F`, `n`, `*`, `h`, `L`, and `l` are not supported and that
there is an extra specifier, `q`. Both width and precision, when
present, are limited to two digits.

The specifier `q` formats booleans, nil, numbers, and strings in a way
that the result is a valid constant in Lua source code. Booleans and nil
are written in the obvious way (`true`, `false`, `nil`). Floats are
written in hexadecimal, to preserve full precision. A string is written
between double quotes, using escape sequences when necessary to ensure
that it can safely be read back by the Lua interpreter. For instance,
the call

         string.format('%q', 'a string with "quotes" and \n new line')

may produce the string:

         "a string with \"quotes\" and \
          new line"

This specifier does not support modifiers (flags, width, precision).

The conversion specifiers `A`, `a`, `E`, `e`, `f`, `G`, and `g` all
expect a number as argument. The specifiers `c`, `d`, `i`, `o`, `u`,
`X`, and `x` expect an integer. When Lua is compiled with a C89
compiler, the specifiers `A` and `a` (hexadecimal floats) do not support
modifiers.

The specifier `s` expects a string; if its argument is not a string, it
is converted to one following the same rules of
[`tostring`](#pdf-tostring). If the specifier has any modifier, the
corresponding string argument should not contain embedded zeros.

The specifier `p` formats the pointer returned by
[`lua_topointer`](#lua_topointer). That gives a unique string identifier
for tables, userdata, threads, strings, and functions. For other values
(numbers, nil, booleans), this specifier results in a string
representing the pointer `NULL`.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `string.gmatch (s, pattern [, init])`

Returns an iterator function that, each time it is called, returns the
next captures from `pattern` (see [Patterns](/06_standard_lib/ch04#patterns)) over the string `s`.
If `pattern` specifies no captures, then the whole match is produced in
each call. A third, optional numeric argument `init` specifies where to
start the search; its default value is 1 and can be negative.

As an example, the following loop will iterate over all the words from
string `s`, printing one per line:

         s = "hello world from Lua"
         for w in string.gmatch(s, "%a+") do
           print(w)
         end

The next example collects all pairs `key=value` from the given string
into a table:

         t = {}
         s = "from=world, to=Lua"
         for k, v in string.gmatch(s, "(%w+)=(%w+)") do
           t[k] = v
         end

For this function, a caret \'`^`\' at the start of a pattern does not
work as an anchor, as this would prevent the iteration.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `string.gsub (s, pattern, repl [, n])`

Returns a copy of `s` in which all (or the first `n`, if given)
occurrences of the `pattern` (see [Patterns](/06_standard_lib/ch04#patterns)) have been replaced
by a replacement string specified by `repl`, which can be a string, a
table, or a function. `gsub` also returns, as its second value, the
total number of matches that occurred. The name `gsub` comes from
*Global SUBstitution*.

If `repl` is a string, then its value is used for replacement. The
character `%` works as an escape character: any sequence in `repl` of
the form `%`*`d`*, with *d* between 1 and 9, stands for the value of the
*d*-th captured substring; the sequence `%0` stands for the whole match;
the sequence `%%` stands for a single `%`.

If `repl` is a table, then the table is queried for every match, using
the first capture as the key.

If `repl` is a function, then this function is called every time a match
occurs, with all captured substrings passed as arguments, in order.

In any case, if the pattern specifies no captures, then it behaves as if
the whole pattern was inside a capture.

If the value returned by the table query or by the function call is a
string or a number, then it is used as the replacement string;
otherwise, if it is **false** or **nil**, then there is no replacement
(that is, the original match is kept in the string).

Here are some examples:

         x = string.gsub("hello world", "(%w+)", "%1 %1")
         --> x="hello hello world world"
         
         x = string.gsub("hello world", "%w+", "%0 %0", 1)
         --> x="hello hello world"
         
         x = string.gsub("hello world from Lua", "(%w+)%s*(%w+)", "%2 %1")
         --> x="world hello Lua from"
         
         x = string.gsub("home = $HOME, user = $USER", "%$(%w+)", os.getenv)
         --> x="home = /home/roberto, user = roberto"
         
         x = string.gsub("4+5 = $return 4+5$", "%$(.-)%$", function (s)
               return load(s)()
             end)
         --> x="4+5 = 9"
         
         local t = {name="lua", version="5.4"}
         x = string.gsub("$name-$version.tar.gz", "%$(%w+)", t)
         --> x="lua-5.4.tar.gz"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `string.len (s)`

Receives a string and returns its length. The empty string `""` has
length 0. Embedded zeros are counted, so `"a\000bc\000"` has length 5.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `string.lower (s)`

Receives a string and returns a copy of this string with all uppercase
letters changed to lowercase. All other characters are left unchanged.
The definition of what an uppercase letter is depends on the current
locale.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `string.match (s, pattern [, init])`

Looks for the first *match* of the `pattern` (see [Patterns](/06_standard_lib/ch04#patterns)) in
the string `s`. If it finds one, then `match` returns the captures from
the pattern; otherwise it returns **fail**. If `pattern` specifies no
captures, then the whole match is returned. A third, optional numeric
argument `init` specifies where to start the search; its default value
is 1 and can be negative.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `string.pack (fmt, v1, v2, ···)`

Returns a binary string containing the values `v1`, `v2`, etc.
serialized in binary form (packed) according to the format string `fmt`
(see [Format Strings for Pack and Unpack](/06_standard_lib/ch04#format-strings-for-pack-and-unpack)).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `string.packsize (fmt)`

Returns the size of a string resulting from
[`string.pack`](#pdf-string.pack) with the given format. The format
string cannot have the variable-length options \'`s`\' or \'`z`\' (see
[Format Strings for Pack and Unpack](/06_standard_lib/ch04#format-strings-for-pack-and-unpack)).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `string.rep (s, n [, sep])`

Returns a string that is the concatenation of `n` copies of the string
`s` separated by the string `sep`. The default value for `sep` is the
empty string (that is, no separator). Returns the empty string if `n` is
not positive.

(Note that it is very easy to exhaust the memory of your machine with a
single call to this function.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `string.reverse (s)`

Returns a string that is the string `s` reversed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `string.sub (s, i [, j])`

Returns the substring of `s` that starts at `i` and continues until `j`;
`i` and `j` can be negative. If `j` is absent, then it is assumed to be
equal to -1 (which is the same as the string length). In particular, the
call `string.sub(s,1,j)` returns a prefix of `s` with length `j`, and
`string.sub(s, -i)` (for a positive `i`) returns a suffix of `s` with
length `i`.

If, after the translation of negative indices, `i` is less than 1, it is
corrected to 1. If `j` is greater than the string length, it is
corrected to that length. If, after these corrections, `i` is greater
than `j`, the function returns the empty string.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `string.unpack (fmt, s [, pos])`

Returns the values packed in string `s` (see
[`string.pack`](#pdf-string.pack)) according to the format string `fmt`
(see [Format Strings for Pack and Unpack](/06_standard_lib/ch04#format-strings-for-pack-and-unpack)). An optional `pos` marks where to start reading
in `s` (default is 1). After the read values, this function also returns
the index of the first unread byte in `s`.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `string.upper (s)`

Receives a string and returns a copy of this string with all lowercase
letters changed to uppercase. All other characters are left unchanged.
The definition of what a lowercase letter is depends on the current
locale.

## Patterns

Patterns in Lua are described by regular strings, which are interpreted
as patterns by the pattern-matching functions
[`string.find`](#pdf-string.find),
[`string.gmatch`](#pdf-string.gmatch),
[`string.gsub`](#pdf-string.gsub), and
[`string.match`](#pdf-string.match). This section describes the syntax
and the meaning (that is, what they match) of these strings.

### Character Class:

A *character class* is used to represent a set of characters. The
following combinations are allowed in describing a character class:

-   ***x*:** (where *x* is not one of the *magic characters*
    `^$()%.[]*+-?`) represents the character *x* itself.

-   **`.`:** (a dot) represents all characters.

-   **`%a`:** represents all letters.

-   **`%c`:** represents all control characters.

-   **`%d`:** represents all digits.

-   **`%g`:** represents all printable characters except space.

-   **`%l`:** represents all lowercase letters.

-   **`%p`:** represents all punctuation characters.

-   **`%s`:** represents all space characters.

-   **`%u`:** represents all uppercase letters.

-   **`%w`:** represents all alphanumeric characters.

-   **`%x`:** represents all hexadecimal digits.

-   **`%`*`x`*:** (where *x* is any non-alphanumeric character)
    represents the character *x*. This is the standard way to escape the
    magic characters. Any non-alphanumeric character (including all
    punctuation characters, even the non-magical) can be preceded by a
    \'`%`\' to represent itself in a pattern.

-   **`[`*`set`*`]`:** represents the class which is the union of all
    characters in *set*. A range of characters can be specified by
    separating the end characters of the range, in ascending order, with
    a \'`-`\'. All classes `%`*x* described above can also be used as
    components in *set*. All other characters in *set* represent
    themselves. For example, `[%w_]` (or `[_%w]`) represents all
    alphanumeric characters plus the underscore, `[0-7]` represents the
    octal digits, and `[0-7%l%-]` represents the octal digits plus the
    lowercase letters plus the \'`-`\' character.

    You can put a closing square bracket in a set by positioning it as
    the first character in the set. You can put a hyphen in a set by
    positioning it as the first or the last character in the set. (You
    can also use an escape for both cases.)

    The interaction between ranges and classes is not defined.
    Therefore, patterns like `[%a-z]` or `[a-%%]` have no meaning.

-   **`[^`*`set`*`]`:** represents the complement of *set*, where *set*
    is interpreted as above.

For all classes represented by single letters (`%a`, `%c`, etc.), the
corresponding uppercase letter represents the complement of the class.
For instance, `%S` represents all non-space characters.

The definitions of letter, space, and other character groups depend on
the current locale. In particular, the class `[a-z]` may not be
equivalent to `%l`.

### Pattern Item:

A *pattern item* can be

-   a single character class, which matches any single character in the
    class;
-   a single character class followed by \'`*`\', which matches
    sequences of zero or more characters in the class. These repetition
    items will always match the longest possible sequence;
-   a single character class followed by \'`+`\', which matches
    sequences of one or more characters in the class. These repetition
    items will always match the longest possible sequence;
-   a single character class followed by \'`-`\', which also matches
    sequences of zero or more characters in the class. Unlike \'`*`\',
    these repetition items will always match the shortest possible
    sequence;
-   a single character class followed by \'`?`\', which matches zero or
    one occurrence of a character in the class. It always matches one
    occurrence if possible;
-   `%`*`n`*, for *n* between 1 and 9; such item matches a substring
    equal to the *n*-th captured string (see below);
-   `%b`*`xy`*, where *x* and *y* are two distinct characters; such item
    matches strings that start with *x*, end with *y*, and where the *x*
    and *y* are *balanced*. This means that, if one reads the string
    from left to right, counting *+1* for an *x* and *-1* for a *y*, the
    ending *y* is the first *y* where the count reaches 0. For instance,
    the item `%b()` matches expressions with balanced parentheses.
-   `%f[`*`set`*`]`, a *frontier pattern*; such item matches an empty
    string at any position such that the next character belongs to *set*
    and the previous character does not belong to *set*. The set *set*
    is interpreted as previously described. The beginning and the end of
    the subject are handled as if they were the character \'`\0`\'.

### Pattern:

A *pattern* is a sequence of pattern items. A caret \'`^`\' at the
beginning of a pattern anchors the match at the beginning of the subject
string. A \'`$`\' at the end of a pattern anchors the match at the end
of the subject string. At other positions, \'`^`\' and \'`$`\' have no
special meaning and represent themselves.

### Captures:

A pattern can contain sub-patterns enclosed in parentheses; they
describe *captures*. When a match succeeds, the substrings of the
subject string that match captures are stored (*captured*) for future
use. Captures are numbered according to their left parentheses. For
instance, in the pattern `"(a*(.)%w(%s*))"`, the part of the string
matching `"a*(.)%w(%s*)"` is stored as the first capture, and therefore
has number 1; the character matching \"`.`\" is captured with number 2,
and the part matching \"`%s*`\" has number 3.

As a special case, the capture `()` captures the current string position
(a number). For instance, if we apply the pattern `"()aa()"` on the
string `"flaaap"`, there will be two captures: 3 and 5.

### Multiple matches:

The function [`string.gsub`](#pdf-string.gsub) and the iterator
[`string.gmatch`](#pdf-string.gmatch) match multiple occurrences of the
given pattern in the subject. For these functions, a new match is
considered valid only if it ends at least one byte after the end of the
previous match. In other words, the pattern machine never accepts the
empty string as a match immediately after another match. As an example,
consider the results of the following code:

         > string.gsub("abc", "()a*()", print);
         --> 1   2
         --> 3   3
         --> 4   4

The second and third results come from Lua matching an empty string
after \'`b`\' and another one after \'`c`\'. Lua does not match an empty
string after \'`a`\', because it would end at the same position of the
previous match.

## Format Strings for Pack and Unpack

The first argument to [`string.pack`](#pdf-string.pack),
[`string.packsize`](#pdf-string.packsize), and
[`string.unpack`](#pdf-string.unpack) is a format string, which
describes the layout of the structure being created or read.

A format string is a sequence of conversion options. The conversion
options are as follows:

-   **`<`:** sets little endian
-   **`>`:** sets big endian
-   **`=`:** sets native endian
-   **`![`*`n`*`]`:** sets maximum alignment to `n` (default is native
    alignment)
-   **`b`:** a signed byte (`char`)
-   **`B`:** an unsigned byte (`char`)
-   **`h`:** a signed `short` (native size)
-   **`H`:** an unsigned `short` (native size)
-   **`l`:** a signed `long` (native size)
-   **`L`:** an unsigned `long` (native size)
-   **`j`:** a `lua_Integer`
-   **`J`:** a `lua_Unsigned`
-   **`T`:** a `size_t` (native size)
-   **`i[`*`n`*`]`:** a signed `int` with `n` bytes (default is native
    size)
-   **`I[`*`n`*`]`:** an unsigned `int` with `n` bytes (default is
    native size)
-   **`f`:** a `float` (native size)
-   **`d`:** a `double` (native size)
-   **`n`:** a `lua_Number`
-   **`c`*`n`*:** a fixed-sized string with `n` bytes
-   **`z`:** a zero-terminated string
-   **`s[`*`n`*`]`:** a string preceded by its length coded as an
    unsigned integer with `n` bytes (default is a `size_t`)
-   **`x`:** one byte of padding
-   **`X`*`op`*:** an empty item that aligns according to option `op`
    (which is otherwise ignored)
-   **\'` `\':** (space) ignored

(A \"`[`*`n`*`]`\" means an optional integral numeral.) Except for
padding, spaces, and configurations (options \"`xX <=>!`\"), each option
corresponds to an argument in [`string.pack`](#pdf-string.pack) or a
result in [`string.unpack`](#pdf-string.unpack).

For options \"`!`*`n`*\", \"`s`*`n`*\", \"`i`*`n`*\", and \"`I`*`n`*\",
`n` can be any integer between 1 and 16. All integral options check
overflows; [`string.pack`](#pdf-string.pack) checks whether the given
value fits in the given size; [`string.unpack`](#pdf-string.unpack)
checks whether the read value fits in a Lua integer. For the unsigned
options, Lua integers are treated as unsigned values too.

Any format string starts as if prefixed by \"`!1=`\", that is, with
maximum alignment of 1 (no alignment) and native endianness.

Native endianness assumes that the whole system is either big or little
endian. The packing functions will not emulate correctly the behavior of
mixed-endian formats.

Alignment works as follows: For each option, the format gets extra
padding until the data starts at an offset that is a multiple of the
minimum between the option size and the maximum alignment; this minimum
must be a power of 2. Options \"`c`\" and \"`z`\" are not aligned;
option \"`s`\" follows the alignment of its starting integer.

All padding is filled with zeros by [`string.pack`](#pdf-string.pack)
and ignored by [`string.unpack`](#pdf-string.unpack).

