# UTF-8 Support

This library provides basic support for UTF-8 encoding. It provides all
its functions inside the table [`utf8`]{#pdf-utf8}. This library does
not provide any support for Unicode other than the handling of the
encoding. Any operation that needs the meaning of a character, such as
character classification, is outside its scope.

Unless stated otherwise, all functions that expect a byte position as a
parameter assume that the given position is either the start of a byte
sequence or one plus the length of the subject string. As in the string
library, negative indices count from the end of the string.

Functions that create byte sequences accept all values up to
`0x7FFFFFFF`, as defined in the original UTF-8 specification; that
implies byte sequences of up to six bytes.

Functions that interpret byte sequences only accept valid sequences
(well formed and not overlong). By default, they only accept byte
sequences that result in valid Unicode code points, rejecting values
greater than `10FFFF` and surrogates. A boolean argument `lax`, when
available, lifts these checks, so that all values up to `0x7FFFFFFF` are
accepted. (Not well formed and overlong sequences are still rejected.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `utf8.char (···)`

Receives zero or more integers, converts each one to its corresponding
UTF-8 byte sequence and returns a string with the concatenation of all
these sequences.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `utf8.charpattern`

The pattern (a string, not a function)
\"`[\0-\x7F\xC2-\xFD][\x80-\xBF]*`\" (see [§6.4.1](#6.4.1)), which
matches exactly one UTF-8 byte sequence, assuming that the subject is a
valid UTF-8 string.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `utf8.codes (s [, lax])`

Returns values so that the construction

         for p, c in utf8.codes(s) do body end

will iterate over all UTF-8 characters in string `s`, with `p` being the
position (in bytes) and `c` the code point of each character. It raises
an error if it meets any invalid byte sequence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `utf8.codepoint (s [, i [, j [, lax]]])`

Returns the code points (as integers) from all characters in `s` that
start between byte position `i` and `j` (both included). The default for
`i` is 1 and for `j` is `i`. It raises an error if it meets any invalid
byte sequence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `utf8.len (s [, i [, j [, lax]]])`

Returns the number of UTF-8 characters in string `s` that start between
positions `i` and `j` (both inclusive). The default for `i` is 1 and for
`j` is -1. If it finds any invalid byte sequence, returns **fail** plus
the position of the first invalid byte.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `utf8.offset (s, n [, i])`

Returns the position (in bytes) where the encoding of the `n`-th
character of `s` (counting from position `i`) starts. A negative `n`
gets characters before position `i`. The default for `i` is 1 when `n`
is non-negative and `#s + 1` otherwise, so that `utf8.offset(s, -n)`
gets the offset of the `n`-th character from the end of the string. If
the specified character is neither in the subject nor right after its
end, the function returns **fail**.

As a special case, when `n` is 0 the function returns the start of the
encoding of the character that contains the `i`-th byte of `s`.

This function assumes that `s` is a valid UTF-8 string.

