# Table Manipulation

This library provides generic functions for table manipulation. It
provides all its functions inside the table [`table`]{#pdf-table}.

Remember that, whenever an operation needs the length of a table, all
caveats about the length operator apply (see [The Length Operator](/03_the_language/ch04#the-length-operator)). All
functions ignore non-numeric keys in the tables given as arguments.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `table.concat (list [, sep [, i [, j]]])`

Given a list where all elements are strings or numbers, returns the
string `list[i]..sep..list[i+1] ··· sep..list[j]`. The default value for
`sep` is the empty string, the default for `i` is 1, and the default for
`j` is `#list`. If `i` is greater than `j`, returns the empty string.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `table.insert (list, [pos,] value)`

Inserts element `value` at position `pos` in `list`, shifting up the
elements `list[pos], list[pos+1], ···, list[#list]`. The default value
for `pos` is `#list+1`, so that a call `table.insert(t,x)` inserts `x`
at the end of the list `t`.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `table.move (a1, f, e, t [,a2])`

Moves elements from the table `a1` to the table `a2`, performing the
equivalent to the following multiple assignment:
`a2[t],··· = a1[f],···,a1[e]`. The default for `a2` is `a1`. The
destination range can overlap with the source range. The number of
elements to be moved must fit in a Lua integer.

Returns the destination table `a2`.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `table.pack (···)`

Returns a new table with all arguments stored into keys 1, 2, etc. and
with a field \"`n`\" with the total number of arguments. Note that the
resulting table may not be a sequence, if some arguments are **nil**.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `table.remove (list [, pos])`

Removes from `list` the element at position `pos`, returning the value
of the removed element. When `pos` is an integer between 1 and `#list`,
it shifts down the elements `list[pos+1], list[pos+2], ···, list[#list]`
and erases element `list[#list]`; The index `pos` can also be 0 when
`#list` is 0, or `#list + 1`.

The default value for `pos` is `#list`, so that a call `table.remove(l)`
removes the last element of the list `l`.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `table.sort (list [, comp])`

Sorts the list elements in a given order, *in-place*, from `list[1]` to
`list[#list]`. If `comp` is given, then it must be a function that
receives two list elements and returns true when the first element must
come before the second in the final order, so that, after the sort,
`i <= j` implies `not comp(list[j],list[i])`. If `comp` is not given,
then the standard Lua operator `<` is used instead.

The `comp` function must define a consistent order; more formally, the
function must define a strict weak order. (A weak order is similar to a
total order, but it can equate different elements for comparison
purposes.)

The sort algorithm is not stable: Different elements considered equal by
the given order may have their relative positions changed by the sort.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## `table.unpack (list [, i [, j]])`

Returns the elements from the given list. This function is equivalent to

         return list[i], list[i+1], ···, list[j]

By default, `i` is 1 and `j` is `#list`.

