# Values and Types

Lua is a dynamically typed language. This means that variables do not
have types; only values do. There are no type definitions in the
language. All values carry their own type.

All values in Lua are first-class values. This means that all values can
be stored in variables, passed as arguments to other functions, and
returned as results.

There are eight basic types in Lua: *nil*, *boolean*, *number*,
*string*, *function*, *userdata*, *thread*, and *table*. The type *nil*
has one single value, **nil**, whose main property is to be different
from any other value; it often represents the absence of a useful value.
The type *boolean* has two values, **false** and **true**. Both **nil**
and **false** make a condition false; they are collectively called
*false values*. Any other value makes a condition true. Despite its
name, **false** is frequently used as an alternative to **nil**, with
the key difference that **false** behaves like a regular value in a
table, while a **nil** in a table represents an absent key.

The type *number* represents both integer numbers and real
(floating-point) numbers, using two subtypes: *integer* and *float*.
Standard Lua uses 64-bit integers and double-precision (64-bit) floats,
but you can also compile Lua so that it uses 32-bit integers and/or
single-precision (32-bit) floats. The option with 32 bits for both
integers and floats is particularly attractive for small machines and
embedded systems. (See macro `LUA_32BITS` in file `luaconf.h`.)

Unless stated otherwise, any overflow when manipulating integer values
*wrap around*, according to the usual rules of two-complement
arithmetic. (In other words, the actual result is the unique
representable integer that is equal modulo *2^n^* to the mathematical
result, where *n* is the number of bits of the integer type.)

Lua has explicit rules about when each subtype is used, but it also
converts between them automatically as needed (see [Coercions and Conversions](/03_the_language/ch04#coercions-and-conversions)).
Therefore, the programmer may choose to mostly ignore the difference
between integers and floats or to assume complete control over the
representation of each number.

The type *string* represents immutable sequences of bytes. Lua is 8-bit
clean: strings can contain any 8-bit value, including embedded zeros
(\'`\0`\'). Lua is also encoding-agnostic; it makes no assumptions about
the contents of a string. The length of any string in Lua must fit in a
Lua integer.

Lua can call (and manipulate) functions written in Lua and functions
written in C (see [Function Calls](/03_the_language/ch04#function-calls)). Both are represented by the type
*function*.

The type *userdata* is provided to allow arbitrary C data to be stored
in Lua variables. A userdata value represents a block of raw memory.
There are two kinds of userdata: *full userdata*, which is an object
with a block of memory managed by Lua, and *light userdata*, which is
simply a C pointer value. Userdata has no predefined operations in Lua,
except assignment and identity test. By using *metatables*, the
programmer can define operations for full userdata values (see
[Metatables and Metamethods](/02_basic_concepts/ch04#metatables-and-metamethods)). Userdata values cannot be created or modified in Lua,
only through the C API. This guarantees the integrity of data owned by
the host program and C libraries.

The type *thread* represents independent threads of execution and it is
used to implement coroutines (see [Coroutines](/02_basic_concepts/ch06#coroutines)). Lua threads are not
related to operating-system threads. Lua supports coroutines on all
systems, even those that do not support threads natively.

The type *table* implements associative arrays, that is, arrays that can
have as indices not only numbers, but any Lua value except **nil** and
NaN. (*Not a Number* is a special floating-point value used by the IEEE
754 standard to represent undefined numerical results, such as `0/0`.)
Tables can be *heterogeneous*; that is, they can contain values of all
types (except **nil**). Any key associated to the value **nil** is not
considered part of the table. Conversely, any key that is not part of a
table has an associated value **nil**.

Tables are the sole data-structuring mechanism in Lua; they can be used
to represent ordinary arrays, lists, symbol tables, sets, records,
graphs, trees, etc. To represent records, Lua uses the field name as an
index. The language supports this representation by providing `a.name`
as syntactic sugar for `a["name"]`. There are several convenient ways to
create tables in Lua (see [Table Constructors](/03_the_language/ch04#table-constructors)).

Like indices, the values of table fields can be of any type. In
particular, because functions are first-class values, table fields can
contain functions. Thus tables can also carry *methods* (see
[Function Definitions](/03_the_language/ch04#function-definitions)).

The indexing of tables follows the definition of raw equality in the
language. The expressions `a[i]` and `a[j]` denote the same table
element if and only if `i` and `j` are raw equal (that is, equal without
metamethods). In particular, floats with integral values are equal to
their respective integers (e.g., `1.0 == 1`). To avoid ambiguities, any
float used as a key that is equal to an integer is converted to that
integer. For instance, if you write `a[2.0] = true`, the actual key
inserted into the table will be the integer `2`.

Tables, functions, threads, and (full) userdata values are *objects*:
variables do not actually *contain* these values, only *references* to
them. Assignment, parameter passing, and function returns always
manipulate references to such values; these operations do not imply any
kind of copy.

The library function [`type`](#pdf-type) returns a string describing the
type of a given value (see [`type`](#pdf-type)).

