## Environments and the Global Environment{#2.2}

As we will discuss further in [§3.2](#3.2) and [§3.3.3](#3.3.3), any
reference to a free name (that is, a name not bound to any declaration)
`var` is syntactically translated to `_ENV.var`. Moreover, every chunk
is compiled in the scope of an external local variable named `_ENV` (see
[§3.3.2](#3.3.2)), so `_ENV` itself is never a free name in a chunk.

Despite the existence of this external `_ENV` variable and the
translation of free names, `_ENV` is a completely regular name. In
particular, you can define new variables and parameters with that name.
Each reference to a free name uses the `_ENV` that is visible at that
point in the program, following the usual visibility rules of Lua (see
[§3.5](#3.5)).

Any table used as the value of `_ENV` is called an *environment*.

Lua keeps a distinguished environment called the *global environment*.
This value is kept at a special index in the C registry (see
[§4.3](#4.3)). In Lua, the global variable [`_G`](#pdf-_G) is
initialized with this same value. ([`_G`](#pdf-_G) is never used
internally, so changing its value will affect only your own code.)

When Lua loads a chunk, the default value for its `_ENV` variable is the
global environment (see [`load`](#pdf-load)). Therefore, by default,
free names in Lua code refer to entries in the global environment and,
therefore, they are also called *global variables*. Moreover, all
standard libraries are loaded in the global environment and some
functions there operate on that environment. You can use
[`load`](#pdf-load) (or [`loadfile`](#pdf-loadfile)) to load a chunk
with a different environment. (In C, you have to load the chunk and then
change the value of its first upvalue; see
[`lua_setupvalue`](#lua_setupvalue).)

