# Error Handling

Several operations in Lua can *raise* an error. An error interrupts the
normal flow of the program, which can continue by *catching* the error.

Lua code can explicitly raise an error by calling the
[`error`]( /06_standard_lib/ch01#error-message-level) function. (This function never returns.)

To catch errors in Lua, you can do a *protected call*, using
[`pcall`]( /06_standard_lib/ch01#pcall-f-arg1-···) (or [`xpcall`]( /06_standard_lib/ch01#xpcall-f-msgh-arg1-···)). The function
[`pcall`]( /06_standard_lib/ch01#pcall-f-arg1-···) calls a given function in *protected mode*. Any
error while running the function stops its execution, and control
returns immediately to `pcall`, which returns a status code.

Because Lua is an embedded extension language, Lua code starts running
by a call from C code in the host program. (When you use Lua standalone,
the `lua` application is the host program.) Usually, this call is
protected; so, when an otherwise unprotected error occurs during the
compilation or execution of a Lua chunk, control returns to the host,
which can take appropriate measures, such as printing an error message.

Whenever there is an error, an *error object* is propagated with
information about the error. Lua itself only generates errors whose
error object is a string, but programs may generate errors with any
value as the error object. It is up to the Lua program or its host to
handle such error objects. For historical reasons, an error object is
often called an *error message*, even though it does not have to be a
string.

When you use [`xpcall`]( /06_standard_lib/ch01#xpcall-f-msgh-arg1-···) (or [`lua_pcall`]( /04_API/ch06#lua-pcall), in
C) you may give a *message handler* to be called in case of errors. This
function is called with the original error object and returns a new
error object. It is called before the error unwinds the stack, so that
it can gather more information about the error, for instance by
inspecting the stack and creating a stack traceback. This message
handler is still protected by the protected call; so, an error inside
the message handler will call the message handler again. If this loop
goes on for too long, Lua breaks it and returns an appropriate message.
The message handler is called only for regular runtime errors. It is not
called for memory-allocation errors nor for errors while running
finalizers or other message handlers.

Lua also offers a system of *warnings* (see [`warn`]( /06_standard_lib/ch01#warn-msg1-···)). Unlike
errors, warnings do not interfere in any way with program execution.
They typically only generate a message to the user, although this
behavior can be adapted from C (see [`lua_setwarnf`]( /04_API/ch06#lua-setwarnf)).

