# Metatables and Metamethods

Every value in Lua can have a *metatable*. This *metatable* is an
ordinary Lua table that defines the behavior of the original value under
certain events. You can change several aspects of the behavior of a
value by setting specific fields in its metatable. For instance, when a
non-numeric value is the operand of an addition, Lua checks for a
function in the field `__add` of the value\'s metatable. If it finds
one, Lua calls this function to perform the addition.

The key for each event in a metatable is a string with the event name
prefixed by two underscores; the corresponding value is called a
*metavalue*. For most events, the metavalue must be a function, which is
then called a *metamethod*. In the previous example, the key is the
string \"`__add`\" and the metamethod is the function that performs the
addition. Unless stated otherwise, a metamethod may in fact be any
callable value, which is either a function or a value with a `__call`
metamethod.

You can query the metatable of any value using the
[`getmetatable`]( /06_standard_lib/ch01#getmetatable-object) function. Lua queries metamethods in
metatables using a raw access (see [`rawget`]( /06_standard_lib/ch01#rawget-table-index)).

You can replace the metatable of tables using the
[`setmetatable`]( /06_standard_lib/ch01#setmetatable-table-metatable) function. You cannot change the
metatable of other types from Lua code, except by using the debug
library ([The Debug Library](/06_standard_lib/ch01#the-debug-library)).

Tables and full userdata have individual metatables, although multiple
tables and userdata can share their metatables. Values of all other
types share one single metatable per type; that is, there is one single
metatable for all numbers, one for all strings, etc. By default, a value
has no metatable, but the string library sets a metatable for the string
type (see [String Manipulation](/06_standard_lib/ch04#string-manipulation)).

A detailed list of operations controlled by metatables is given next.
Each event is identified by its corresponding key. By convention, all
metatable keys used by Lua are composed by two underscores followed by
lowercase Latin letters.

-   **`__add`:** the addition (`+`) operation. If any operand for an
    addition is not a number, Lua will try to call a metamethod. It
    starts by checking the first operand (even if it is a number); if
    that operand does not define a metamethod for `__add`, then Lua will
    check the second operand. If Lua can find a metamethod, it calls the
    metamethod with the two operands as arguments, and the result of the
    call (adjusted to one value) is the result of the operation.
    Otherwise, if no metamethod is found, Lua raises an error.

-   **`__sub`:** the subtraction (`-`) operation. Behavior similar to
    the addition operation.

-   **`__mul`:** the multiplication (`*`) operation. Behavior similar to
    the addition operation.

-   **`__div`:** the division (`/`) operation. Behavior similar to the
    addition operation.

-   **`__mod`:** the modulo (`%`) operation. Behavior similar to the
    addition operation.

-   **`__pow`:** the exponentiation (`^`) operation. Behavior similar to
    the addition operation.

-   **`__unm`:** the negation (unary `-`) operation. Behavior similar to
    the addition operation.

-   **`__idiv`:** the floor division (`//`) operation. Behavior similar
    to the addition operation.

-   **`__band`:** the bitwise AND (`&`) operation. Behavior similar to
    the addition operation, except that Lua will try a metamethod if any
    operand is neither an integer nor a float coercible to an integer
    (see [Coercions and Conversions](/03_the_language/ch04#coercions-and-conversions)).

-   **`__bor`:** the bitwise OR (`|`) operation. Behavior similar to the
    bitwise AND operation.

-   **`__bxor`:** the bitwise exclusive OR (binary `~`) operation.
    Behavior similar to the bitwise AND operation.

-   **`__bnot`:** the bitwise NOT (unary `~`) operation. Behavior
    similar to the bitwise AND operation.

-   **`__shl`:** the bitwise left shift (`<<`) operation. Behavior
    similar to the bitwise AND operation.

-   **`__shr`:** the bitwise right shift (`>>`) operation. Behavior
    similar to the bitwise AND operation.

-   **`__concat`:** the concatenation (`..`) operation. Behavior similar
    to the addition operation, except that Lua will try a metamethod if
    any operand is neither a string nor a number (which is always
    coercible to a string).

-   **`__len`:** the length (`#`) operation. If the object is not a
    string, Lua will try its metamethod. If there is a metamethod, Lua
    calls it with the object as argument, and the result of the call
    (always adjusted to one value) is the result of the operation. If
    there is no metamethod but the object is a table, then Lua uses the
    table length operation (see [The Length Operator](/03_the_language/ch04#the-length-operator)). Otherwise, Lua raises
    an error.

-   **`__eq`:** the equal (`==`) operation. Behavior similar to the
    addition operation, except that Lua will try a metamethod only when
    the values being compared are either both tables or both full
    userdata and they are not primitively equal. The result of the call
    is always converted to a boolean.

-   **`__lt`:** the less than (`<`) operation. Behavior similar to the
    addition operation, except that Lua will try a metamethod only when
    the values being compared are neither both numbers nor both strings.
    Moreover, the result of the call is always converted to a boolean.

-   **`__le`:** the less equal (`<=`) operation. Behavior similar to the
    less than operation.

-   **`__index`:** The indexing access operation `table[key]`. This
    event happens when `table` is not a table or when `key` is not
    present in `table`. The metavalue is looked up in the metatable of
    `table`.

    The metavalue for this event can be either a function, a table, or
    any value with an `__index` metavalue. If it is a function, it is
    called with `table` and `key` as arguments, and the result of the
    call (adjusted to one value) is the result of the operation.
    Otherwise, the final result is the result of indexing this metavalue
    with `key`. This indexing is regular, not raw, and therefore can
    trigger another `__index` metavalue.

-   **`__newindex`:** The indexing assignment `table[key] = value`. Like
    the index event, this event happens when `table` is not a table or
    when `key` is not present in `table`. The metavalue is looked up in
    the metatable of `table`.

    Like with indexing, the metavalue for this event can be either a
    function, a table, or any value with an `__newindex` metavalue. If
    it is a function, it is called with `table`, `key`, and `value` as
    arguments. Otherwise, Lua repeats the indexing assignment over this
    metavalue with the same key and value. This assignment is regular,
    not raw, and therefore can trigger another `__newindex` metavalue.

    Whenever a `__newindex` metavalue is invoked, Lua does not perform
    the primitive assignment. If needed, the metamethod itself can call
    [`rawset`]( /06_standard_lib/ch01#rawset-table-index-value) to do the assignment.

-   **`__call`:** The call operation `func(args)`. This event happens
    when Lua tries to call a non-function value (that is, `func` is not
    a function). The metamethod is looked up in `func`. If present, the
    metamethod is called with `func` as its first argument, followed by
    the arguments of the original call (`args`). All results of the call
    are the results of the operation. This is the only metamethod that
    allows multiple results.

In addition to the previous list, the interpreter also respects the
following keys in metatables: `__gc` (see [Garbage-Collection Metamethods](/02_basic_concepts/ch05#garbage-collection-metamethods)), `__close`
(see [To-be-closed Variables](/03_the_language/ch03#to-be-closed-variables)), `__mode` (see [Weak Tables](/02_basic_concepts/ch05#weak-tables)), and `__name`.
(The entry `__name`, when it contains a string, may be used by
[`tostring`]( /06_standard_lib/ch01#tostring-v) and in error messages.)

For the unary operators (negation, length, and bitwise NOT), the
metamethod is computed and called with a dummy second operand, equal to
the first one. This extra operand is only to simplify Lua\'s internals
(by making these operators behave like a binary operation) and may be
removed in future versions. For most uses this extra operand is
irrelevant.

Because metatables are regular tables, they can contain arbitrary
fields, not only the event names defined above. Some functions in the
standard library (e.g., [`tostring`]( /06_standard_lib/ch01#tostring-v)) use other fields in
metatables for their own purposes.

It is a good practice to add all needed metamethods to a table before
setting it as a metatable of some object. In particular, the `__gc`
metamethod works only when this order is followed (see
[Garbage-Collection Metamethods](/02_basic_concepts/ch05#garbage-collection-metamethods)). It is also a good practice to set the metatable of an
object right after its creation.

