# Garbage Collection{#2.5}

Lua performs automatic memory management. This means that you do not
have to worry about allocating memory for new objects or freeing it when
the objects are no longer needed. Lua manages memory automatically by
running a *garbage collector* to collect all *dead* objects. All memory
used by Lua is subject to automatic management: strings, tables,
userdata, functions, threads, internal structures, etc.

An object is considered *dead* as soon as the collector can be sure the
object will not be accessed again in the normal execution of the
program. (\"Normal execution\" here excludes finalizers, which can
resurrect dead objects (see [Garbage-Collection Metamethods](/02_basic_concepts/ch05#garbage-collection-metamethods)), and excludes also
operations using the debug library.) Note that the time when the
collector can be sure that an object is dead may not coincide with the
programmer\'s expectations. The only guarantees are that Lua will not
collect an object that may still be accessed in the normal execution of
the program, and it will eventually collect an object that is
inaccessible from Lua. (Here, *inaccessible from Lua* means that neither
a variable nor another live object refer to the object.) Because Lua has
no knowledge about C code, it never collects objects accessible through
the registry (see [Registry](/04_API/ch03#registry)), which includes the global environment
(see [Environments and the Global Environment](/02_basic_concepts/ch02#environments-and-the-global-environment)).

The garbage collector (GC) in Lua can work in two modes: incremental and
generational.

The default GC mode with the default parameters are adequate for most
uses. However, programs that waste a large proportion of their time
allocating and freeing memory can benefit from other settings. Keep in
mind that the GC behavior is non-portable both across platforms and
across different Lua releases; therefore, optimal settings are also
non-portable.

You can change the GC mode and parameters by calling [`lua_gc`](#lua_gc)
in C or [`collectgarbage`](#pdf-collectgarbage) in Lua. You can also use
these functions to control the collector directly (e.g., to stop and
restart it).

## Incremental Garbage Collection

In incremental mode, each GC cycle performs a mark-and-sweep collection
in small steps interleaved with the program\'s execution. In this mode,
the collector uses three numbers to control its garbage-collection
cycles: the *garbage-collector pause*, the *garbage-collector step
multiplier*, and the *garbage-collector step size*.

The garbage-collector pause controls how long the collector waits before
starting a new cycle. The collector starts a new cycle when the use of
memory hits *n%* of the use after the previous collection. Larger values
make the collector less aggressive. Values equal to or less than 100
mean the collector will not wait to start a new cycle. A value of 200
means that the collector waits for the total memory in use to double
before starting a new cycle. The default value is 200; the maximum value
is 1000.

The garbage-collector step multiplier controls the speed of the
collector relative to memory allocation, that is, how many elements it
marks or sweeps for each kilobyte of memory allocated. Larger values
make the collector more aggressive but also increase the size of each
incremental step. You should not use values less than 100, because they
make the collector too slow and can result in the collector never
finishing a cycle. The default value is 100; the maximum value is 1000.

The garbage-collector step size controls the size of each incremental
step, specifically how many bytes the interpreter allocates before
performing a step. This parameter is logarithmic: A value of *n* means
the interpreter will allocate *2^n^* bytes between steps and perform
equivalent work during the step. A large value (e.g., 60) makes the
collector a stop-the-world (non-incremental) collector. The default
value is 13, which means steps of approximately 8 Kbytes.

## Generational Garbage Collection

In generational mode, the collector does frequent *minor* collections,
which traverses only objects recently created. If after a minor
collection the use of memory is still above a limit, the collector does
a stop-the-world *major* collection, which traverses all objects. The
generational mode uses two parameters: the *minor multiplier* and the
*the major multiplier*.

The minor multiplier controls the frequency of minor collections. For a
minor multiplier *x*, a new minor collection will be done when memory
grows *x%* larger than the memory in use after the previous major
collection. For instance, for a multiplier of 20, the collector will do
a minor collection when the use of memory gets 20% larger than the use
after the previous major collection. The default value is 20; the
maximum value is 200.

The major multiplier controls the frequency of major collections. For a
major multiplier *x*, a new major collection will be done when memory
grows *x%* larger than the memory in use after the previous major
collection. For instance, for a multiplier of 100, the collector will do
a major collection when the use of memory gets larger than twice the use
after the previous collection. The default value is 100; the maximum
value is 1000.

## Garbage-Collection Metamethods

You can set garbage-collector metamethods for tables and, using the
C API, for full userdata (see [Metatables and Metamethods](/02_basic_concepts/ch04#metatables-and-metamethods)). These metamethods, called
*finalizers*, are called when the garbage collector detects that the
corresponding table or userdata is dead. Finalizers allow you to
coordinate Lua\'s garbage collection with external resource management
such as closing files, network or database connections, or freeing your
own memory.

For an object (table or userdata) to be finalized when collected, you
must *mark* it for finalization. You mark an object for finalization
when you set its metatable and the metatable has a `__gc` metamethod.
Note that if you set a metatable without a `__gc` field and later create
that field in the metatable, the object will not be marked for
finalization.

When a marked object becomes dead, it is not collected immediately by
the garbage collector. Instead, Lua puts it in a list. After the
collection, Lua goes through that list. For each object in the list, it
checks the object\'s `__gc` metamethod: If it is present, Lua calls it
with the object as its single argument.

At the end of each garbage-collection cycle, the finalizers are called
in the reverse order that the objects were marked for finalization,
among those collected in that cycle; that is, the first finalizer to be
called is the one associated with the object marked last in the program.
The execution of each finalizer may occur at any point during the
execution of the regular code.

Because the object being collected must still be used by the finalizer,
that object (and other objects accessible only through it) must be
*resurrected* by Lua. Usually, this resurrection is transient, and the
object memory is freed in the next garbage-collection cycle. However, if
the finalizer stores the object in some global place (e.g., a global
variable), then the resurrection is permanent. Moreover, if the
finalizer marks a finalizing object for finalization again, its
finalizer will be called again in the next cycle where the object is
dead. In any case, the object memory is freed only in a GC cycle where
the object is dead and not marked for finalization.

When you close a state (see [`lua_close`](#lua_close)), Lua calls the
finalizers of all objects marked for finalization, following the reverse
order that they were marked. If any finalizer marks objects for
collection during that phase, these marks have no effect.

Finalizers cannot yield nor run the garbage collector. Because they can
run in unpredictable times, it is good practice to restrict each
finalizer to the minimum necessary to properly release its associated
resource.

Any error while running a finalizer generates a warning; the error is
not propagated.

## Weak Tables

A *weak table* is a table whose elements are *weak references*. A weak
reference is ignored by the garbage collector. In other words, if the
only references to an object are weak references, then the garbage
collector will collect that object.

A weak table can have weak keys, weak values, or both. A table with weak
values allows the collection of its values, but prevents the collection
of its keys. A table with both weak keys and weak values allows the
collection of both keys and values. In any case, if either the key or
the value is collected, the whole pair is removed from the table. The
weakness of a table is controlled by the `__mode` field of its
metatable. This metavalue, if present, must be one of the following
strings: \"`k`\", for a table with weak keys; \"`v`\", for a table with
weak values; or \"`kv`\", for a table with both weak keys and values.

A table with weak keys and strong values is also called an *ephemeron
table*. In an ephemeron table, a value is considered reachable only if
its key is reachable. In particular, if the only reference to a key
comes through its value, the pair is removed.

Any change in the weakness of a table may take effect only at the next
collect cycle. In particular, if you change the weakness to a stronger
mode, Lua may still collect some items from that table before the change
takes effect.

Only objects that have an explicit construction are removed from weak
tables. Values, such as numbers and light C functions, are not subject
to garbage collection, and therefore are not removed from weak tables
(unless their associated values are collected). Although strings are
subject to garbage collection, they do not have an explicit construction
and their equality is by value; they behave more like values than like
objects. Therefore, they are not removed from weak tables.

Resurrected objects (that is, objects being finalized and objects
accessible only through objects being finalized) have a special behavior
in weak tables. They are removed from weak values before running their
finalizers, but are removed from weak keys only in the next collection
after running their finalizers, when such objects are actually freed.
This behavior allows the finalizer to access properties associated with
the object through weak tables.

If a weak table is among the resurrected objects in a collection cycle,
it may not be properly cleared until the next cycle.

