# Coroutines

Lua supports coroutines, also called *collaborative multithreading*. A
coroutine in Lua represents an independent thread of execution. Unlike
threads in multithread systems, however, a coroutine only suspends its
execution by explicitly calling a yield function.

You create a coroutine by calling
[`coroutine.create`]( /06_standard_lib/ch02#coroutine-create-f). Its sole argument is a
function that is the main function of the coroutine. The `create`
function only creates a new coroutine and returns a handle to it (an
object of type *thread*); it does not start the coroutine.

You execute a coroutine by calling
[`coroutine.resume`]( /06_standard_lib/ch02#coroutine-resume-co-val1-···). When you first call
[`coroutine.resume`]( /06_standard_lib/ch02#coroutine-resume-co-val1-···), passing as its first
argument a thread returned by
[`coroutine.create`]( /06_standard_lib/ch02#coroutine-create-f), the coroutine starts its
execution by calling its main function. Extra arguments passed to
[`coroutine.resume`]( /06_standard_lib/ch02#coroutine-resume-co-val1-···) are passed as arguments to
that function. After the coroutine starts running, it runs until it
terminates or *yields*.

A coroutine can terminate its execution in two ways: normally, when its
main function returns (explicitly or implicitly, after the last
instruction); and abnormally, if there is an unprotected error. In case
of normal termination, [`coroutine.resume`]( /06_standard_lib/ch02#coroutine-resume-co-val1-···)
returns **true**, plus any values returned by the coroutine main
function. In case of errors, [`coroutine.resume`]( /06_standard_lib/ch02#coroutine-resume-co-val1-···)
returns **false** plus the error object. In this case, the coroutine
does not unwind its stack, so that it is possible to inspect it after
the error with the debug API.

A coroutine yields by calling [`coroutine.yield`]( /06_standard_lib/ch02#coroutine-yield-···).
When a coroutine yields, the corresponding
[`coroutine.resume`]( /06_standard_lib/ch02#coroutine-resume-co-val1-···) returns immediately, even if
the yield happens inside nested function calls (that is, not in the main
function, but in a function directly or indirectly called by the main
function). In the case of a yield,
[`coroutine.resume`]( /06_standard_lib/ch02#coroutine-resume-co-val1-···) also returns **true**, plus
any values passed to [`coroutine.yield`]( /06_standard_lib/ch02#coroutine-yield-···). The next
time you resume the same coroutine, it continues its execution from the
point where it yielded, with the call to
[`coroutine.yield`]( /06_standard_lib/ch02#coroutine-yield-···) returning any extra arguments
passed to [`coroutine.resume`]( /06_standard_lib/ch02#coroutine-resume-co-val1-···).

Like [`coroutine.create`]( /06_standard_lib/ch02#coroutine-create-f), the
[`coroutine.wrap`]( /06_standard_lib/ch02#coroutine-wrap-f) function also creates a
coroutine, but instead of returning the coroutine itself, it returns a
function that, when called, resumes the coroutine. Any arguments passed
to this function go as extra arguments to
[`coroutine.resume`]( /06_standard_lib/ch02#coroutine-resume-co-val1-···).
[`coroutine.wrap`]( /06_standard_lib/ch02#coroutine-wrap-f) returns all the values returned
by [`coroutine.resume`]( /06_standard_lib/ch02#coroutine-resume-co-val1-···), except the first one
(the boolean error code). Unlike
[`coroutine.resume`]( /06_standard_lib/ch02#coroutine-resume-co-val1-···), the function created by
[`coroutine.wrap`]( /06_standard_lib/ch02#coroutine-wrap-f) propagates any error to the
caller. In this case, the function also closes the coroutine (see
[`coroutine.close`]( /06_standard_lib/ch02#coroutine-close-co)).

As an example of how coroutines work, consider the following code:

         function foo (a)
           print("foo", a)
           return coroutine.yield(2*a)
         end
         
         co = coroutine.create(function (a,b)
               print("co-body", a, b)
               local r = foo(a+1)
               print("co-body", r)
               local r, s = coroutine.yield(a+b, a-b)
               print("co-body", r, s)
               return b, "end"
         end)
         
         print("main", coroutine.resume(co, 1, 10))
         print("main", coroutine.resume(co, "r"))
         print("main", coroutine.resume(co, "x", "y"))
         print("main", coroutine.resume(co, "x", "y"))

When you run it, it produces the following output:

         co-body 1       10
         foo     2
         main    true    4
         co-body r
         main    true    11      -9
         co-body x       y
         main    true    10      end
         main    false   cannot resume dead coroutine

You can also create and manipulate coroutines through the C API: see
functions [`lua_newthread`]( /04_API/ch06#lua-newthread),
[`lua_resume`]( /04_API/ch06#lua-resume), and [`lua_yield`]( /04_API/ch06#lua-yield).

