# Lexical Conventions

Lua is a free-form language. It ignores spaces and comments between
lexical elements (tokens), except as delimiters between two tokens. In
source code, Lua recognizes as spaces the standard ASCII whitespace
characters space, form feed, newline, carriage return, horizontal tab,
and vertical tab.

*Names* (also called *identifiers*) in Lua can be any string of Latin
letters, Arabic-Indic digits, and underscores, not beginning with a
digit and not being a reserved word. Identifiers are used to name
variables, table fields, and labels.

The following *keywords* are reserved and cannot be used as names:

         and       break     do        else      elseif    end
         false     for       function  goto      if        in
         local     nil       not       or        repeat    return
         then      true      until     while

Lua is a case-sensitive language: `and` is a reserved word, but `And`
and `AND` are two different, valid names. As a convention, programs
should avoid creating names that start with an underscore followed by
one or more uppercase letters (such as [`_VERSION`]( /06_standard_lib/ch01#-version)).

The following strings denote other tokens:

         +     -     *     /     %     ^     #
         &     ~     |     <<    >>    //
         ==    ~=    <=    >=    <     >     =
         (     )     {     }     [     ]     ::
         ;     :     ,     .     ..    ...

A *short literal string* can be delimited by matching single or double
quotes, and can contain the following C-like escape sequences: \'`\a`\'
(bell), \'`\b`\' (backspace), \'`\f`\' (form feed), \'`\n`\' (newline),
\'`\r`\' (carriage return), \'`\t`\' (horizontal tab), \'`\v`\'
(vertical tab), \'`\\`\' (backslash), \'`\"`\' (quotation mark \[double
quote\]), and \'`\'`\' (apostrophe \[single quote\]). A backslash
followed by a line break results in a newline in the string. The escape
sequence \'`\z`\' skips the following span of whitespace characters,
including line breaks; it is particularly useful to break and indent a
long literal string into multiple lines without adding the newlines and
spaces into the string contents. A short literal string cannot contain
unescaped line breaks nor escapes not forming a valid escape sequence.

We can specify any byte in a short literal string, including embedded
zeros, by its numeric value. This can be done with the escape sequence
`\x`*`XX`*, where *XX* is a sequence of exactly two hexadecimal digits,
or with the escape sequence `\`*`ddd`*, where *ddd* is a sequence of up
to three decimal digits. (Note that if a decimal escape sequence is to
be followed by a digit, it must be expressed using exactly three
digits.)

The UTF-8 encoding of a Unicode character can be inserted in a literal
string with the escape sequence `\u{`*`XXX`*`}` (with mandatory
enclosing braces), where *XXX* is a sequence of one or more hexadecimal
digits representing the character code point. This code point can be any
value less than *2^31^*. (Lua uses the original UTF-8 specification
here, which is not restricted to valid Unicode code points.)

Literal strings can also be defined using a long format enclosed by
*long brackets*. We define an *opening long bracket of level *n** as an
opening square bracket followed by *n* equal signs followed by another
opening square bracket. So, an opening long bracket of level 0 is
written as `[[`, an opening long bracket of level 1 is written as `[=[`,
and so on. A *closing long bracket* is defined similarly; for instance,
a closing long bracket of level 4 is written as `]====]`. A *long
literal* starts with an opening long bracket of any level and ends at
the first closing long bracket of the same level. It can contain any
text except a closing bracket of the same level. Literals in this
bracketed form can run for several lines, do not interpret any escape
sequences, and ignore long brackets of any other level. Any kind of
end-of-line sequence (carriage return, newline, carriage return followed
by newline, or newline followed by carriage return) is converted to a
simple newline. When the opening long bracket is immediately followed by
a newline, the newline is not included in the string.

As an example, in a system using ASCII (in which \'`a`\' is coded as 97,
newline is coded as 10, and \'`1`\' is coded as 49), the five literal
strings below denote the same string:

         a = 'alo\n123"'
         a = "alo\n123\""
         a = '\97lo\10\04923"'
         a = [[alo
         123"]]
         a = [==[
         alo
         123"]==]

Any byte in a literal string not explicitly affected by the previous
rules represents itself. However, Lua opens files for parsing in text
mode, and the system\'s file functions may have problems with some
control characters. So, it is safer to represent binary data as a quoted
literal with explicit escape sequences for the non-text characters.

A *numeric constant* (or *numeral*) can be written with an optional
fractional part and an optional decimal exponent, marked by a letter
\'`e`\' or \'`E`\'. Lua also accepts hexadecimal constants, which start
with `0x` or `0X`. Hexadecimal constants also accept an optional
fractional part plus an optional binary exponent, marked by a letter
\'`p`\' or \'`P`\'.

A numeric constant with a radix point or an exponent denotes a float;
otherwise, if its value fits in an integer or it is a hexadecimal
constant, it denotes an integer; otherwise (that is, a decimal integer
numeral that overflows), it denotes a float. Hexadecimal numerals with
neither a radix point nor an exponent always denote an integer value; if
the value overflows, it *wraps around* to fit into a valid integer.

Examples of valid integer constants are

         3   345   0xff   0xBEBADA

Examples of valid float constants are

         3.0     3.1416     314.16e-2     0.31416E1     34e1
         0x0.1E  0xA23p-4   0X1.921FB54442D18P+1

A *comment* starts with a double hyphen (`--`) anywhere outside a
string. If the text immediately after `--` is not an opening long
bracket, the comment is a *short comment*, which runs until the end of
the line. Otherwise, it is a *long comment*, which runs until the
corresponding closing long bracket.

