# Statements

Lua supports an almost conventional set of statements, similar to those
in other conventional languages. This set includes blocks, assignments,
control structures, function calls, and variable declarations.

## Blocks

A block is a list of statements, which are executed sequentially:

        block ::= {stat}

Lua has *empty statements* that allow you to separate statements with
semicolons, start a block with a semicolon or write two semicolons in
sequence:

        stat ::= ‘;’

Both function calls and assignments can start with an open parenthesis.
This possibility leads to an ambiguity in Lua\'s grammar. Consider the
following fragment:

         a = b + c
         (print or io.write)('done')

The grammar could see this fragment in two ways:

         a = b + c(print or io.write)('done')
         
         a = b + c; (print or io.write)('done')

The current parser always sees such constructions in the first way,
interpreting the open parenthesis as the start of the arguments to a
call. To avoid this ambiguity, it is a good practice to always precede
with a semicolon statements that start with a parenthesis:

         ;(print or io.write)('done')

A block can be explicitly delimited to produce a single statement:

        stat ::= do block end

Explicit blocks are useful to control the scope of variable
declarations. Explicit blocks are also sometimes used to add a
**return** statement in the middle of another block (see
[Control Structures](/03_the_language/ch03#control-structures)).

## Chunks

The unit of compilation of Lua is called a *chunk*. Syntactically, a
chunk is simply a block:

        chunk ::= block

Lua handles a chunk as the body of an anonymous function with a variable
number of arguments (see [Function Definitions](/03_the_language/ch04#function-definitions)). As such, chunks can define
local variables, receive arguments, and return values. Moreover, such
anonymous function is compiled as in the scope of an external local
variable called `_ENV` (see [Environments and the Global Environment](/02_basic_concepts/ch02#environments-and-the-global-environment)). The resulting function always
has `_ENV` as its only external variable, even if it does not use that
variable.

A chunk can be stored in a file or in a string inside the host program.
To execute a chunk, Lua first *loads* it, precompiling the chunk\'s code
into instructions for a virtual machine, and then Lua executes the
compiled code with an interpreter for the virtual machine.

Chunks can also be precompiled into binary form; see the program `luac`
and the function [`string.dump`]( /06_standard_lib/ch04#string-dump-function-strip) for details. Programs
in source and compiled forms are interchangeable; Lua automatically
detects the file type and acts accordingly (see [`load`]( /06_standard_lib/ch01#load-chunk-chunkname-mode-env)).

## Assignment

Lua allows multiple assignments. Therefore, the syntax for assignment
defines a list of variables on the left side and a list of expressions
on the right side. The elements in both lists are separated by commas:

        stat ::= varlist ‘=’ explist
        varlist ::= var {‘,’ var}
        explist ::= exp {‘,’ exp}

Expressions are discussed in [Expressions](/03_the_language/ch04#expressions).

Before the assignment, the list of values is *adjusted* to the length of
the list of variables. If there are more values than needed, the excess
values are thrown away. If there are fewer values than needed, the list
is extended with **nil**\'s. If the list of expressions ends with a
function call, then all values returned by that call enter the list of
values, before the adjustment (except when the call is enclosed in
parentheses; see [Expressions](/03_the_language/ch04#expressions)).

If a variable is both assigned and read inside a multiple assignment,
Lua ensures all reads get the value of the variable before the
assignment. Thus the code

         i = 3
         i, a[i] = i+1, 20

sets `a[3]` to 20, without affecting `a[4]` because the `i` in `a[i]` is
evaluated (to 3) before it is assigned 4. Similarly, the line

         x, y = y, x

exchanges the values of `x` and `y`, and

         x, y, z = y, z, x

cyclically permutes the values of `x`, `y`, and `z`.

Note that this guarantee covers only accesses syntactically inside the
assignment statement. If a function or a metamethod called during the
assignment changes the value of a variable, Lua gives no guarantees
about the order of that access.

An assignment to a global name `x = val` is equivalent to the assignment
`_ENV.x = val` (see [Environments and the Global Environment](/02_basic_concepts/ch02#environments-and-the-global-environment)).

The meaning of assignments to table fields and global variables (which
are actually table fields, too) can be changed via metatables (see
[Metatables and Metamethods](/02_basic_concepts/ch04#metatables-and-metamethods)).

## Control Structures

The control structures **if**, **while**, and **repeat** have the usual
meaning and familiar syntax:

        stat ::= while exp do block end
        stat ::= repeat block until exp
        stat ::= if exp then block {elseif exp then block} [else block] end

Lua also has a **for** statement, in two flavors (see [For Statement](/03_the_language/ch03#for-statement)).

The condition expression of a control structure can return any value.
Both **false** and **nil** test false. All values different from **nil**
and **false** test true. In particular, the number 0 and the empty
string also test true.

In the **repeat**--**until** loop, the inner block does not end at the
**until** keyword, but only after the condition. So, the condition can
refer to local variables declared inside the loop block.

The **goto** statement transfers the program control to a label. For
syntactical reasons, labels in Lua are considered statements too:

        stat ::= goto Name
        stat ::= label
        label ::= ‘::’ Name ‘::’

A label is visible in the entire block where it is defined, except
inside nested functions. A goto may jump to any visible label as long as
it does not enter into the scope of a local variable. A label should not
be declared where a label with the same name is visible, even if this
other label has been declared in an enclosing block.

Labels and empty statements are called *void statements*, as they
perform no actions.

The **break** statement terminates the execution of a **while**,
**repeat**, or **for** loop, skipping to the next statement after the
loop:

        stat ::= break

A **break** ends the innermost enclosing loop.

The **return** statement is used to return values from a function or a
chunk (which is handled as an anonymous function). Functions can return
more than one value, so the syntax for the **return** statement is

        stat ::= return [explist] [‘;’]

The **return** statement can only be written as the last statement of a
block. If it is necessary to **return** in the middle of a block, then
an explicit inner block can be used, as in the idiom `do return end`,
because now **return** is the last statement in its (inner) block.

## For Statement

The **for** statement has two forms: one numerical and one generic.

### The numerical **for** loop

The numerical **for** loop repeats a block of code while a control
variable goes through an arithmetic progression. It has the following
syntax:

        stat ::= for Name ‘=’ exp ‘,’ exp [‘,’ exp] do block end

The given identifier (Name) defines the control variable, which is a new
variable local to the loop body (*block*).

The loop starts by evaluating once the three control expressions. Their
values are called respectively the *initial value*, the *limit*, and the
*step*. If the step is absent, it defaults to 1.

If both the initial value and the step are integers, the loop is done
with integers; note that the limit may not be an integer. Otherwise, the
three values are converted to floats and the loop is done with floats.
Beware of floating-point accuracy in this case.

After that initialization, the loop body is repeated with the value of
the control variable going through an arithmetic progression, starting
at the initial value, with a common difference given by the step. A
negative step makes a decreasing sequence; a step equal to zero raises
an error. The loop continues while the value is less than or equal to
the limit (greater than or equal to for a negative step). If the initial
value is already greater than the limit (or less than, if the step is
negative), the body is not executed.

For integer loops, the control variable never wraps around; instead, the
loop ends in case of an overflow.

You should not change the value of the control variable during the loop.
If you need its value after the loop, assign it to another variable
before exiting the loop.

### The generic **for** loop

The generic **for** statement works over functions, called *iterators*.
On each iteration, the iterator function is called to produce a new
value, stopping when this new value is **nil**. The generic **for** loop
has the following syntax:

        stat ::= for namelist in explist do block end
        namelist ::= Name {‘,’ Name}

A **for** statement like

         for var_1, ···, var_n in explist do body end

works as follows.

The names *var_i* declare loop variables local to the loop body. The
first of these variables is the *control variable*.

The loop starts by evaluating *explist* to produce four values: an
*iterator function*, a *state*, an initial value for the control
variable, and a *closing value*.

Then, at each iteration, Lua calls the iterator function with two
arguments: the state and the control variable. The results from this
call are then assigned to the loop variables, following the rules of
multiple assignments (see [Assignment](/03_the_language/ch03#assignment)). If the control variable
becomes **nil**, the loop terminates. Otherwise, the body is executed
and the loop goes to the next iteration.

The closing value behaves like a to-be-closed variable (see
[To-be-closed Variables](/03_the_language/ch03#to-be-closed-variables)), which can be used to release resources when the loop
ends. Otherwise, it does not interfere with the loop.

You should not change the value of the control variable during the loop.

## Function Calls as Statements

To allow possible side-effects, function calls can be executed as
statements:

        stat ::= functioncall

In this case, all returned values are thrown away. Function calls are
explained in [Function Calls](/03_the_language/ch04#function-calls).

## Local Declarations

Local variables can be declared anywhere inside a block. The declaration
can include an initialization:

        stat ::= local attnamelist [‘=’ explist]
        attnamelist ::=  Name attrib {‘,’ Name attrib}

If present, an initial assignment has the same semantics of a multiple
assignment (see [Assignment](/03_the_language/ch03#assignment)). Otherwise, all variables are
initialized with **nil**.

Each variable name may be postfixed by an attribute (a name between
angle brackets):

        attrib ::= [‘<’ Name ‘>’]

There are two possible attributes: `const`, which declares a constant
variable, that is, a variable that cannot be assigned to after its
initialization; and `close`, which declares a to-be-closed variable (see
[To-be-closed Variables](/03_the_language/ch03#to-be-closed-variables)). A list of variables can contain at most one
to-be-closed variable.

A chunk is also a block (see [Chunks](/03_the_language/ch03#chunks)), and so local variables
can be declared in a chunk outside any explicit block.

The visibility rules for local variables are explained in [Visibility Rules](/03_the_language/ch05#visibility-rules).

## To-be-closed Variables

A to-be-closed variable behaves like a constant local variable, except
that its value is *closed* whenever the variable goes out of scope,
including normal block termination, exiting its block by
**break**/**goto**/**return**, or exiting by an error.

Here, to *close* a value means to call its `__close` metamethod. When
calling the metamethod, the value itself is passed as the first argument
and the error object that caused the exit (if any) is passed as a second
argument; if there was no error, the second argument is **nil**.

The value assigned to a to-be-closed variable must have a `__close`
metamethod or be a false value. (**nil** and **false** are ignored as
to-be-closed values.)

If several to-be-closed variables go out of scope at the same event,
they are closed in the reverse order that they were declared.

If there is any error while running a closing method, that error is
handled like an error in the regular code where the variable was
defined. After an error, the other pending closing methods will still be
called.

If a coroutine yields and is never resumed again, some variables may
never go out of scope, and therefore they will never be closed. (These
variables are the ones created inside the coroutine and in scope at the
point where the coroutine yielded.) Similarly, if a coroutine ends with
an error, it does not unwind its stack, so it does not close any
variable. In both cases, you can either use finalizers or call
[`coroutine.close`]( /06_standard_lib/ch02#coroutine-close-co) to close the variables.
However, if the coroutine was created through
[`coroutine.wrap`]( /06_standard_lib/ch02#coroutine-wrap-f), then its corresponding function
will close the coroutine in case of errors.

