# Expressions

The basic expressions in Lua are the following:

        exp ::= prefixexp
        exp ::= nil | false | true
        exp ::= Numeral
        exp ::= LiteralString
        exp ::= functiondef
        exp ::= tableconstructor
        exp ::= ‘...’
        exp ::= exp binop exp
        exp ::= unop exp
        prefixexp ::= var | functioncall | ‘(’ exp ‘)’

Numerals and literal strings are explained in [§3.1](#3.1); variables
are explained in [§3.2](#3.2); function definitions are explained in
[§3.4.11](#3.4.11); function calls are explained in [§3.4.10](#3.4.10);
table constructors are explained in [§3.4.9](#3.4.9). Vararg
expressions, denoted by three dots (\'`...`\'), can only be used when
directly inside a vararg function; they are explained in
[§3.4.11](#3.4.11).

Binary operators comprise arithmetic operators (see [§3.4.1](#3.4.1)),
bitwise operators (see [§3.4.2](#3.4.2)), relational operators (see
[§3.4.4](#3.4.4)), logical operators (see [§3.4.5](#3.4.5)), and the
concatenation operator (see [§3.4.6](#3.4.6)). Unary operators comprise
the unary minus (see [§3.4.1](#3.4.1)), the unary bitwise NOT (see
[§3.4.2](#3.4.2)), the unary logical **not** (see [§3.4.5](#3.4.5)), and
the unary *length operator* (see [§3.4.7](#3.4.7)).

Both function calls and vararg expressions can result in multiple
values. If a function call is used as a statement (see
[§3.3.6](#3.3.6)), then its return list is adjusted to zero elements,
thus discarding all returned values. If an expression is used as the
last (or the only) element of a list of expressions, then no adjustment
is made (unless the expression is enclosed in parentheses). In all other
contexts, Lua adjusts the result list to one element, either discarding
all values except the first one or adding a single **nil** if there are
no values.

Here are some examples:

         f()                -- adjusted to 0 results
         g(f(), x)          -- f() is adjusted to 1 result
         g(x, f())          -- g gets x plus all results from f()
         a,b,c = f(), x     -- f() is adjusted to 1 result (c gets nil)
         a,b = ...          -- a gets the first vararg argument, b gets
                            -- the second (both a and b can get nil if there
                            -- is no corresponding vararg argument)
         
         a,b,c = x, f()     -- f() is adjusted to 2 results
         a,b,c = f()        -- f() is adjusted to 3 results
         return f()         -- returns all results from f()
         return ...         -- returns all received vararg arguments
         return x,y,f()     -- returns x, y, and all results from f()
         {f()}              -- creates a list with all results from f()
         {...}              -- creates a list with all vararg arguments
         {f(), nil}         -- f() is adjusted to 1 result

Any expression enclosed in parentheses always results in only one value.
Thus, `(f(x,y,z))` is always a single value, even if `f` returns several
values. (The value of `(f(x,y,z))` is the first value returned by `f` or
**nil** if `f` does not return any values.)

## Arithmetic Operators

Lua supports the following arithmetic operators:

-   **`+`:** addition
-   **`-`:** subtraction
-   **`*`:** multiplication
-   **`/`:** float division
-   **`//`:** floor division
-   **`%`:** modulo
-   **`^`:** exponentiation
-   **`-`:** unary minus

With the exception of exponentiation and float division, the arithmetic
operators work as follows: If both operands are integers, the operation
is performed over integers and the result is an integer. Otherwise, if
both operands are numbers, then they are converted to floats, the
operation is performed following the machine\'s rules for floating-point
arithmetic (usually the IEEE 754 standard), and the result is a float.
(The string library coerces strings to numbers in arithmetic operations;
see [§3.4.3](#3.4.3) for details.)

Exponentiation and float division (`/`) always convert their operands to
floats and the result is always a float. Exponentiation uses the ISO C
function `pow`, so that it works for non-integer exponents too.

Floor division (`//`) is a division that rounds the quotient towards
minus infinity, resulting in the floor of the division of its operands.

Modulo is defined as the remainder of a division that rounds the
quotient towards minus infinity (floor division).

In case of overflows in integer arithmetic, all operations *wrap
around*.

## Bitwise Operators

Lua supports the following bitwise operators:

-   **`&`:** bitwise AND
-   **`|`:** bitwise OR
-   **`~`:** bitwise exclusive OR
-   **`>>`:** right shift
-   **`<<`:** left shift
-   **`~`:** unary bitwise NOT

All bitwise operations convert its operands to integers (see
[§3.4.3](#3.4.3)), operate on all bits of those integers, and result in
an integer.

Both right and left shifts fill the vacant bits with zeros. Negative
displacements shift to the other direction; displacements with absolute
values equal to or higher than the number of bits in an integer result
in zero (as all bits are shifted out).

## Coercions and Conversions

Lua provides some automatic conversions between some types and
representations at run time. Bitwise operators always convert float
operands to integers. Exponentiation and float division always convert
integer operands to floats. All other arithmetic operations applied to
mixed numbers (integers and floats) convert the integer operand to a
float. The C API also converts both integers to floats and floats to
integers, as needed. Moreover, string concatenation accepts numbers as
arguments, besides strings.

In a conversion from integer to float, if the integer value has an exact
representation as a float, that is the result. Otherwise, the conversion
gets the nearest higher or the nearest lower representable value. This
kind of conversion never fails.

The conversion from float to integer checks whether the float has an
exact representation as an integer (that is, the float has an integral
value and it is in the range of integer representation). If it does,
that representation is the result. Otherwise, the conversion fails.

Several places in Lua coerce strings to numbers when necessary. In
particular, the string library sets metamethods that try to coerce
strings to numbers in all arithmetic operations. If the conversion
fails, the library calls the metamethod of the other operand (if
present) or it raises an error. Note that bitwise operators do not do
this coercion.

Nonetheless, it is always a good practice not to rely on these implicit
coercions, as they are not always applied; in particular, `"1"==1` is
false and `"1"<1` raises an error (see [§3.4.4](#3.4.4)). These
coercions exist mainly for compatibility and may be removed in future
versions of the language.

A string is converted to an integer or a float following its syntax and
the rules of the Lua lexer. The string may have also leading and
trailing whitespaces and a sign. All conversions from strings to numbers
accept both a dot and the current locale mark as the radix character.
(The Lua lexer, however, accepts only a dot.) If the string is not a
valid numeral, the conversion fails. If necessary, the result of this
first step is then converted to a specific number subtype following the
previous rules for conversions between floats and integers.

The conversion from numbers to strings uses a non-specified
human-readable format. To convert numbers to strings in any specific
way, use the function [`string.format`](#pdf-string.format).

## Relational Operators

Lua supports the following relational operators:

-   **`==`:** equality
-   **`~=`:** inequality
-   **`<`:** less than
-   **`>`:** greater than
-   **`<=`:** less or equal
-   **`>=`:** greater or equal

These operators always result in **false** or **true**.

Equality (`==`) first compares the type of its operands. If the types
are different, then the result is **false**. Otherwise, the values of
the operands are compared. Strings are equal if they have the same byte
content. Numbers are equal if they denote the same mathematical value.

Tables, userdata, and threads are compared by reference: two objects are
considered equal only if they are the same object. Every time you create
a new object (a table, a userdata, or a thread), this new object is
different from any previously existing object. A function is always
equal to itself. Functions with any detectable difference (different
behavior, different definition) are always different. Functions created
at different times but with no detectable differences may be classified
as equal or not (depending on internal caching details).

You can change the way that Lua compares tables and userdata by using
the `__eq` metamethod (see [§2.4](#2.4)).

Equality comparisons do not convert strings to numbers or vice versa.
Thus, `"0"==0` evaluates to **false**, and `t[0]` and `t["0"]` denote
different entries in a table.

The operator `~=` is exactly the negation of equality (`==`).

The order operators work as follows. If both arguments are numbers, then
they are compared according to their mathematical values, regardless of
their subtypes. Otherwise, if both arguments are strings, then their
values are compared according to the current locale. Otherwise, Lua
tries to call the `__lt` or the `__le` metamethod (see [§2.4](#2.4)). A
comparison `a > b` is translated to `b < a` and `a >= b` is translated
to `b <= a`.

Following the IEEE 754 standard, the special value NaN is considered
neither less than, nor equal to, nor greater than any value, including
itself.

## Logical Operators

The logical operators in Lua are **and**, **or**, and **not**. Like the
control structures (see [§3.3.4](#3.3.4)), all logical operators
consider both **false** and **nil** as false and anything else as true.

The negation operator **not** always returns **false** or **true**. The
conjunction operator **and** returns its first argument if this value is
**false** or **nil**; otherwise, **and** returns its second argument.
The disjunction operator **or** returns its first argument if this value
is different from **nil** and **false**; otherwise, **or** returns its
second argument. Both **and** and **or** use short-circuit evaluation;
that is, the second operand is evaluated only if necessary. Here are
some examples:

         10 or 20            --> 10
         10 or error()       --> 10
         nil or "a"          --> "a"
         nil and 10          --> nil
         false and error()   --> false
         false and nil       --> false
         false or nil        --> nil
         10 and 20           --> 20

## Concatenation

The string concatenation operator in Lua is denoted by two dots
(\'`..`\'). If both operands are strings or numbers, then the numbers
are converted to strings in a non-specified format (see
[§3.4.3](#3.4.3)). Otherwise, the `__concat` metamethod is called (see
[§2.4](#2.4)).

## The Length Operator

The length operator is denoted by the unary prefix operator `#`.

The length of a string is its number of bytes. (That is the usual
meaning of string length when each character is one byte.)

The length operator applied on a table returns a border in that table. A
*border* in a table `t` is any non-negative integer that satisfies the
following condition:

         (border == 0 or t[border] ~= nil) and
         (t[border + 1] == nil or border == math.maxinteger)

In words, a border is any positive integer index present in the table
that is followed by an absent index, plus two limit cases: zero, when
index 1 is absent; and the maximum value for an integer, when that index
is present. Note that keys that are not positive integers do not
interfere with borders.

A table with exactly one border is called a *sequence*. For instance,
the table `{10, 20, 30, 40, 50}` is a sequence, as it has only one
border (5). The table `{10, 20, 30, nil, 50}` has two borders (3 and 5),
and therefore it is not a sequence. (The **nil** at index 4 is called a
*hole*.) The table `{nil, 20, 30, nil, nil, 60, nil}` has three borders
(0, 3, and 6), so it is not a sequence, too. The table `{}` is a
sequence with border 0.

When `t` is a sequence, `#t` returns its only border, which corresponds
to the intuitive notion of the length of the sequence. When `t` is not a
sequence, `#t` can return any of its borders. (The exact one depends on
details of the internal representation of the table, which in turn can
depend on how the table was populated and the memory addresses of its
non-numeric keys.)

The computation of the length of a table has a guaranteed worst time of
*O(log n)*, where *n* is the largest integer key in the table.

A program can modify the behavior of the length operator for any value
but strings through the `__len` metamethod (see [§2.4](#2.4)).

## Precedence

Operator precedence in Lua follows the table below, from lower to higher
priority:

         or
         and
         <     >     <=    >=    ~=    ==
         |
         ~
         &
         <<    >>
         ..
         +     -
         *     /     //    %
         unary operators (not   #     -     ~)
         ^

As usual, you can use parentheses to change the precedences of an
expression. The concatenation (\'`..`\') and exponentiation (\'`^`\')
operators are right associative. All other binary operators are left
associative.

## Table Constructors

Table constructors are expressions that create tables. Every time a
constructor is evaluated, a new table is created. A constructor can be
used to create an empty table or to create a table and initialize some
of its fields. The general syntax for constructors is

        tableconstructor ::= ‘{’ [fieldlist] ‘}’
        fieldlist ::= field {fieldsep field} [fieldsep]
        field ::= ‘[’ exp ‘]’ ‘=’ exp | Name ‘=’ exp | exp
        fieldsep ::= ‘,’ | ‘;’

Each field of the form `[exp1] = exp2` adds to the new table an entry
with key `exp1` and value `exp2`. A field of the form `name = exp` is
equivalent to `["name"] = exp`. Fields of the form `exp` are equivalent
to `[i] = exp`, where `i` are consecutive integers starting with 1;
fields in the other formats do not affect this counting. For example,

         a = { [f(1)] = g; "x", "y"; x = 1, f(x), [30] = 23; 45 }

is equivalent to

         do
           local t = {}
           t[f(1)] = g
           t[1] = "x"         -- 1st exp
           t[2] = "y"         -- 2nd exp
           t.x = 1            -- t["x"] = 1
           t[3] = f(x)        -- 3rd exp
           t[30] = 23
           t[4] = 45          -- 4th exp
           a = t
         end

The order of the assignments in a constructor is undefined. (This order
would be relevant only when there are repeated keys.)

If the last field in the list has the form `exp` and the expression is a
function call or a vararg expression, then all values returned by this
expression enter the list consecutively (see [§3.4.10](#3.4.10)).

The field list can have an optional trailing separator, as a convenience
for machine-generated code.

## Function Calls

A function call in Lua has the following syntax:

        functioncall ::= prefixexp args

In a function call, first prefixexp and args are evaluated. If the value
of prefixexp has type *function*, then this function is called with the
given arguments. Otherwise, if present, the prefixexp `__call`
metamethod is called: its first argument is the value of prefixexp,
followed by the original call arguments (see [§2.4](#2.4)).

The form

        functioncall ::= prefixexp ‘:’ Name args

can be used to emulate methods. A call `v:name(`*`args`*`)` is syntactic
sugar for `v.name(v,`*`args`*`)`, except that `v` is evaluated only
once.

Arguments have the following syntax:

        args ::= ‘(’ [explist] ‘)’
        args ::= tableconstructor
        args ::= LiteralString

All argument expressions are evaluated before the call. A call of the
form `f{`*`fields`*`}` is syntactic sugar for `f({`*`fields`*`})`; that
is, the argument list is a single new table. A call of the form
`f'`*`string`*`'` (or `f"`*`string`*`"` or `f[[`*`string`*`]]`) is
syntactic sugar for `f('`*`string`*`')`; that is, the argument list is a
single literal string.

A call of the form `return `*`functioncall`* not in the scope of a
to-be-closed variable is called a *tail call*. Lua implements *proper
tail calls* (or *proper tail recursion*): in a tail call, the called
function reuses the stack entry of the calling function. Therefore,
there is no limit on the number of nested tail calls that a program can
execute. However, a tail call erases any debug information about the
calling function. Note that a tail call only happens with a particular
syntax, where the **return** has one single function call as argument,
and it is outside the scope of any to-be-closed variable. This syntax
makes the calling function return exactly the returns of the called
function, without any intervening action. So, none of the following
examples are tail calls:

         return (f(x))        -- results adjusted to 1
         return 2 * f(x)      -- result multiplied by 2
         return x, f(x)       -- additional results
         f(x); return         -- results discarded
         return x or f(x)     -- results adjusted to 1

## Function Definitions

The syntax for function definition is

        functiondef ::= function funcbody
        funcbody ::= ‘(’ [parlist] ‘)’ block end

The following syntactic sugar simplifies function definitions:

        stat ::= function funcname funcbody
        stat ::= local function Name funcbody
        funcname ::= Name {‘.’ Name} [‘:’ Name]

The statement

         function f () body end

translates to

         f = function () body end

The statement

         function t.a.b.c.f () body end

translates to

         t.a.b.c.f = function () body end

The statement

         local function f () body end

translates to

         local f; f = function () body end

not to

         local f = function () body end

(This only makes a difference when the body of the function contains
references to `f`.)

A function definition is an executable expression, whose value has type
*function*. When Lua precompiles a chunk, all its function bodies are
precompiled too, but they are not created yet. Then, whenever Lua
executes the function definition, the function is *instantiated* (or
*closed*). This function instance, or *closure*, is the final value of
the expression.

Parameters act as local variables that are initialized with the argument
values:

        parlist ::= namelist [‘,’ ‘...’] | ‘...’

When a Lua function is called, it adjusts its list of arguments to the
length of its list of parameters, unless the function is a *vararg
function*, which is indicated by three dots (\'`...`\') at the end of
its parameter list. A vararg function does not adjust its argument list;
instead, it collects all extra arguments and supplies them to the
function through a *vararg expression*, which is also written as three
dots. The value of this expression is a list of all actual extra
arguments, similar to a function with multiple results. If a vararg
expression is used inside another expression or in the middle of a list
of expressions, then its return list is adjusted to one element. If the
expression is used as the last element of a list of expressions, then no
adjustment is made (unless that last expression is enclosed in
parentheses).

As an example, consider the following definitions:

         function f(a, b) end
         function g(a, b, ...) end
         function r() return 1,2,3 end

Then, we have the following mapping from arguments to parameters and to
the vararg expression:

         CALL             PARAMETERS
         
         f(3)             a=3, b=nil
         f(3, 4)          a=3, b=4
         f(3, 4, 5)       a=3, b=4
         f(r(), 10)       a=1, b=10
         f(r())           a=1, b=2
         
         g(3)             a=3, b=nil, ... -->  (nothing)
         g(3, 4)          a=3, b=4,   ... -->  (nothing)
         g(3, 4, 5, 8)    a=3, b=4,   ... -->  5  8
         g(5, r())        a=5, b=1,   ... -->  2  3

Results are returned using the **return** statement (see
[§3.3.4](#3.3.4)). If control reaches the end of a function without
encountering a **return** statement, then the function returns with no
results.

There is a system-dependent limit on the number of values that a
function may return. This limit is guaranteed to be greater than 1000.

The *colon* syntax is used to emulate *methods*, adding an implicit
extra parameter `self` to the function. Thus, the statement

         function t.a.b.c:f (params) body end

is syntactic sugar for

         t.a.b.c.f = function (self, params) body end

